Butter Thief.txt                                   5/2/2017

śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ




Butter Thief




His Divine Grace

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




For more eBook titles on bhakti-yoga by Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, please visit




www.purebhakti.com




© 2014 Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights
Reserved.



To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/



Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

Digital Edition:

ePub: ISBN 978-1-63316-069-9

Kindle: ISBN 978-1-63316-068-2

Printed Edition: ISBN 978-1-935428-04-6

First Edition: May 2010, 30,000 copies

Cover artwork and photo of Śrīla Prabhupāda ©
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, Intl. Used with permission.
www.krishna.com

Translation of quoted verses that are marked with an
asterisk (*) are by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja ©
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International.

                           1
Butter Thief.txt                            5/2/2017


Contributors

ePub Encoding • Sanātana dāsa




Contents


Guru-paramparā Images

Introduction




CHAPTER ONE

Hearing Kṛṣṇa’s Pastimes

Reliable and Essential Knowledge

Bhakti-yoga

The Descent of The Lord

The Blessings of Hearing Kṛṣṇa’s Pastimes




CHAPTER TWO

The Lord’s Childhood Pastimes

Introduction

One Absolute Truth Appearing as Two

When The Absolute Truth Grows Up

Yaśodā Remebers Kṛṣṇa

Baby Wrestlers

Complaining in Love

The Runaway Calf

Kṛṣṇa Only Accepts Love And Affection

Delicious Banana Peels

Kṛṣṇa is Let Down

Caught in the Act




                           2
Butter Thief.txt                             5/2/2017



CHAPTER THREE

Bound By Love

Yaśodā Maiyā’s Beauty

Yaśodā’s Singing

Kṛṣṇa Searches for Yaśodā

Desperate Milk

Gurudeva Engages Devotees

Yaśodā Defeats Kṛṣṇa

The Servant of the Servant

Weakened by Love

Breaking The Yoghurt Pot

Kṛṣṇa Rewards His Devotees

The Zigzag Course Of The Absolute

The Speed Of Love

A Loving Quarrel

Binding Kṛṣṇa with Love and Affection




CHAPTER FOUR

A Flood Of Affection

Yaśodā’s Doubt

The Opposition Party

The Plan for Deliverance

A Strong Lesson

The Liberation of Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva

Yaśodā’s Fear And Shock

Nanda Bābā Releases the Supreme

A Meal in the Cow Barn

“Bring Kṛṣṇa to Yaśodā Maiyā”




                             3
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

CHAPTER FIVE

The Glorious Fruit-Seller

Attracted by Nanda-Nandana

Calling Out To Kṛṣṇa

The Fruit-Seller’s Vow

Kṛṣṇa Reciprocates His Devotee’s Love

A Basket Of Jewels

Singing From The Heart




About the Author

Book List

Websites




Introduction


This small book, The Butter Thief, is a summary study of
one of the most remarkable and illuminating pastimes of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This
pastime is found in the venerable Bhāgavata Purāṇa,
considered by self-realized authorities and scholars as
the ripened fruit of the vast tree of Vedic literature.
There are many religious scriptures that aim to help the
conditioned souls living in this world, to realize their
divine spiritual nature, and their eternal, loving
relationship with God. However, nowhere except the Vedas
and specifically the Bhāgavata Purāṇa, will one find
such detailed revelation of the personal aspect of God,
His transcendental world, and the sublimely sweet,
loving pastimes performed by Him and His eternal,
liberated associates.

To help the conditioned souls to awaken their attraction
to the Lord, He mercifully descends to this world along
with His associates and His abode, to display His
magnificent transcendental pastimes. By hearing and
contemplating these pastimes with attention and honor, a
desire to be with the Lord and to serve Him will stir
within the heart.

This book is compiled from a series of lectures
delivered by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja in Vṛndāvana, India, the place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
divine birth and childhood pastimes. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja is a life-long devotee and self-
realized scholar, deeply immersed in the sublime
spiritual truths contained in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes and

                             4
Butter Thief.txt                                 5/2/2017

instructions. The intention of these discourses is to
reveal the extraordinary quality of the love that
devotees feel for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and that He feels for them.

That love may be exhibited in different moods. Some may
express their love for the Lord as servants, or friends,
or as parents, and even as wives or lovers. These roles
are not imaginary or temporary, but are the actual
eternal identity of the liberated souls. In these
identities, the devotees exchange an infinite variety of
enthralling spiritual sentiments with the ultimate
object of their love, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. By hearing of these
loving exchanges, one may be elevated to that same plane
of transcendent love.

This pastime of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, where he is known as the
Butter Thief, is particularly charming. Absorbed by His
own desire, in the role of a naughty young boy, Kṛṣṇa
delights His mother and all the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana
with His sweet, child-like activities. One of His
favorite pastimes is to stealthily enter into the homes
of the other mothers in Vṛndāvana, and eat the butter
that they have made and carefully hidden from Him. This
butter, which they have churned with their own hands, is
made while entranced in a mood of great love for Krsna.
By stealing and eating this butter, He is actually
tasting their love for Him, and stealing their very
hearts as well.

Mother Yaśodā is concerned that her child is becoming
too mischievous, and in order to keep Him from growing
into a young rascal, decides to punish Him by binding
Him to a large grinding mortar. The Supreme Lord, Who
possesses unlimited, inconceivable potencies, thus
agrees to be bound like an ordinary child, in order to
experience the superlatively sweet mood of parental love
and concern displayed by His mother. He thus becomes
controlled by the love of His own devotee. This is the
highest mystery in transcendental science. The Supreme
Lord is the Controller of all controllers, yet He
becomes submissive to the love of His dear devotees.

In this engaging narrative spoken by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, we get a glimpse of that eternal
divine realm of the Lord, where every word is a song,
and every step a dance, where Kṛṣṇa and His devotees
eternally engage in an ever-changing, ever fresh drama
of sweet loving pastimes. May the Lord and His divine
associates bestow Their mercy and grant us entrance into
that most sacred Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.

This book is based entirely on the first edition
compiled and edited by Śrīmatī Syāmarāṇī didi. The book
follows the first edition with some minor changes based
on additional information gleaned from more recent
lectures and literature translated by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja.




Humbly in the service of Śrī Guru & Vaiṣṇavas,


                           5
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

Bhaktivedānta Vaikhanas Mahārāja




CHAPTER ONE


Hearing Kṛṣṇa’s Pastimes


Reliable and Essential Knowledge


The Vedic culture of India is steeped in esoteric
knowledge, and has developed to such a degree that the
sages in this culture have discovered the soul. They
have also discovered God within and without, and through
research into the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they
have even discovered and realised different
relationships with God. We can never imagine or realise
transcendental relationships with the Supreme
Personality of Godhead through our imperfect material
senses and knowledge.

However, the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself transmits
transcendental knowledge through an unbroken succession
of spiritual masters and disciples. He personally
imparted this transcendental knowledge to Brahmā (the
creator of the material universe). Brahmā then gave it
to Nārada, Nārada to Vyāsa, and Vyāsa to Śukadeva. This
process of disciplic succession established a body of
transcendental knowledge that has descended to us from
the perfect source. We should trust this disciplic
succession and try our best to follow it.

What is God’s transcendental nature? What can we know of
His omnipotence and mercy? What relationship do we have
with Him, and how can we realise this relationship and
serve Him eternally? These topics have been elaborately
described and explained in the great scripture Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, which contains the essence of all Vedic
literature. There are twelve cantos Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
and its most important instructions are contained in the
Tenth Canto. The purpose of this booklet is to explain
the essence of the Tenth Canto. It is very attractive
and enjoyable to read, and will help you to practise
bhakti-yoga, linking with God through love and devotion.




Bhakti-yoga


We must practise bhakti-yoga in order to understand and
realise the Absolute Truth. Otherwise, we cannot realise
anything transcendental. In order to appreciate what
bhakti (devotion) is, we must first know that the soul
and Supersoul exist eternally. Kṛṣṇa is eternally the
one Supersoul, and the innumerable individual souls like
us, are also eternal.

                           6
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017


Two pure souls (the individual soul and the Supreme
Soul, Kṛṣṇa) can only come together through the medium
of love and affection. This love and affection is called
bhakti-yoga. There are many categories of transcendental
love and affection, or prema. The liberated souls serve
Kṛṣṇa eternally in the pure and transcendental realm of
Vaikuṇṭha. Within Vaikuṇṭha is Kṛṣṇa’s supreme abode,
which is called Goloka-Vṛndāvana. He is served there
with the most perfect moods of transcendental love and
affection (prema).

Conditioned souls are materially bound, and covered by
māyā or illusion. They are only qualified to serve
bodies which are made of matter, not spirit. Conditioned
souls are always unhappy because they are suffering in
the chain of birth and death. How can they realise their
eternal transcendental identity and relationship with
God? They have to practise bhakti-yoga from the
beginning stages, and develop progressively and
regularly from the stage of faith. This progresses to
steadiness in devotional practices, then to awakening of
spiritual taste, and to deepening transcendental
attachment that matures into transcendental ecstasy.
Finally one achieves full, pure love of God. This is the
way.




The Descent of The Lord


It is only through bhakti-yoga that we can realise the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. We cannot do so by any
other means. The Supreme Lord is so merciful that He
personally descends to this world to bestow His mercy on
the conditioned souls who inhabit it. The Lord descends
in various incarnations (avatāras) throughout history.
The original form of the Lord from which all these other
forms come is Kṛṣṇa. Thus He is known as the original
Personality of Godhead(svayam-bhagavān).

When Kṛṣṇa descends to this world, He appears in His
original transcendental form, which is attractive to all
living beings. What to speak of human beings, He also
attracts the animals, deer, birds, and trees. Kṛṣṇa
attracts all creatures, because He attracts the soul,
which is present in all living things, even in water
particles and dust. The soul is present everywhere. If
you practise bhakti-yoga, you can see and realise this
fact, and you will gradually develop devotion to Kṛṣṇa.

People generally do not appreciate hearing philosophical
conclusions alone. For this reason I want to explain
about prema, pure transcendental love of God, by
narrating Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. This bhakti-yoga will appear
more attractive if we explain the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam - how Kṛṣṇa descends to this world, how He
protects the saintly persons and kills the demons, and
how He performs His supremely attractive pastimes.



                           7
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017




The Blessings of Hearing Kṛṣṇa’s Pastimes


Kṛṣṇa’s name and pastimes are not mundane things of this
mortal world; they are transcendental. Hearing Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes is not an ordinary activity; it is also
transcendental.

There is a vast difference between the mortal world and
the transcendental world. When we glorify Kṛṣṇa’s
qualities and pastimes, or chant His holy names, the
transcendental sound vibration is extremely auspicious.
Even if one is covered with ignorance and his heart is
full of unwanted material thoughts and desires, still,
if he has a little honour — just a very little — these
transcendental vibrations will come through his ears to
his heart. These are not words in the common sense;
Kṛṣṇa Himself comes in these transcendental sound
vibrations. How? His transcendental world comes into the
heart of any person who has a slight fraction of faith
(śraddhā). As one gains realisation, his whole heart
becomes clean and pure, and his faith (śraddhā) becomes
more condensed. Transcendental devotion (bhakti) then
manifests in his heart, and he becomes a devotee.

This process actually begins when a devotee acquires
faith in Śrī Gurudeva and accepts initiation from him.
Under the guidance of Śrī Guru, one begins the practice
of devotional service (bhajana-kriyā). All the unwanted
material conceptions and desires flee from his heart,
and all his bad habits go away (anartha-nivṛtti). Then
he develops fixed and stable practice of devotional
principles (niṣṭhā). This matures into a genuine
spiritual taste for devotional practices (ruci) which
evolves into transcendental attachment for the Lord
(āsakti).

After that, his devotion develops to the stage of
transcendental ecstasy (bhāva), and then fully ripened
transcendental love for Kṛṣṇa, or prema. At some point,
he will give up his material body, mind, false ego,
etc., and be situated in his pure spiritual identity. In
a transcendental body, the devotee associates with Kṛṣṇa
as an eternal resident of Vraja, and becomes happy
forever.




CHAPTER TWO


The Lord’s Childhood Pastimes


Introduction


The Vedic literatures — including the first nine cantos
of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam — describe the extraordinary

                           8
Butter Thief.txt                                5/2/2017

pastimes of the Supreme Lord, which are not at all
possible for human beings, or even for the demigods. In
these pastimes, it is clear to all that He is the
Absolute, Supreme Personality of Godhead.

The Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam reveals
confidential pastimes that only take place in Vraja, or
Vṛndāvana. There the Supreme Lord appears like an
ordinary human being, and His devotees do not think that
He is the Supreme Lord. Rather, they see Him as the
supremely attractive personality, and they can therefore
serve Him in intimate moods of love and affection. This
would not be possible if His devotees thought that He is
God.

In these Vraja pastimes, Kṛṣṇa appeared to take birth,
perform pastimes as a helpless baby, and then mature
into childhood and youth. However, unlike us, He is not
subject to the changes imposed by material nature. He
only acts as an ordinary child to delight His
affectionate devotees. He is always the same unchanging,
all-knowing, all-powerful, transcendental Supreme
Personality of Godhead. But to facilitate these
pastimes, His pastime potency Yogamāyā, covers His
knowledge, so that even He forgets that He is God. Thus,
He and His devotees can become completely absorbed in
these intimate, loving exchanges.




One Absolute Truth Appearing as Two


Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva are the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. One may ask how two Personalities can both be
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. We should understand
that although They manifest two bodies, Baladeva is
actually non-different from Kṛṣṇa. They are both One.
Kṛṣṇa has appeared in the body of Baladeva, and the
purpose of this incarnation is to teach us how to serve
Kṛṣṇa.

Baladeva Prabhu is the sum total of the eternal
principle of guru. He imparts all the eternal truths and
principles, and teaches us how to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa,
that is, Kṛṣṇa with His eternal consort.




When The Absolute Truth Grows Up


We, conditioned souls, start life as babies; then grow
into children, youths and adults, and from adulthood, we
advance to old age. Kṛṣṇa, however, does not go through
these stages. In His eternal pastimes in the spiritual
world, He is always a very beautiful teenage boy. He
never becomes older or younger. However, when He
displays His pastimes in the material world, He
manifests all these stages of growth in order to

                           9
Butter Thief.txt                                5/2/2017

increase the love and affection of the devotees and to
attract the minds and hearts of the conditioned souls in
this world.

Although Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva are the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, They played in Vraja as naked babies, and
crawled everywhere on Their hands and knees. Kṛṣṇa’s
mother is called Yaśodā, and Baladeva’s mother is called
Rohiṇī.

Sometimes, Kṛṣṇa or Baladeva would see a snake and catch
it. When Yaśodā and Rohiṇī saw this, they became afraid.
Sometimes the boys would put Their hands in the mouths
of wild dogs, and the dogs became very calm.

They learned a very good game; They would seize the tail
of a dog or a calf, and hold on tightly, and the dog or
calf would playfully drag Them around the yard.
Sometimes Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva would catch the horns of
very large and ferocious bulls, and wrestle and play
with them, and the bulls would lovingly play with Kṛṣṇa
and Baladeva.




Yaśodā Remebers Kṛṣṇa


While Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva were still very young babies,
They sometimes crawled to the outer gate of the house.
If They saw anyone, They became afraid. They remembered
Their mothers, and at once turned back, and rushed to
sit in their laps. And what did Yaśodā, and Rohiṇī do
then? They put Them in their laps, covered Them with
their veils, and caressed Their hair; and then with
tears in their eyes, and with melting hearts, they put
their breasts in the mouths of Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva.

Sometimes a neighbor would come into Yaśodā Maiyā’s
courtyard. What did she see? Yaśodā Maiyā engaged in
churning butter and performing other duties, just to
prepare something for Kṛṣṇa. She had no other
occupation. She was always engaged in serving Kṛṣṇa, and
whenever she was performing service, she always
remembered him and sang: “Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti,
Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti.”

Kṛṣṇa was crawling in the house and courtyard, and she
was making everything neat and clean to protect Him.
While she did so, she was singing like this: “Govinda
Dāmodara Mādhaveti, Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti.”

Sometimes she was engaged in grinding something with a
pestle and mortar, and as she did so, she sang: “Govinda
Dāmodara Mādhaveti, Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti.”

Sometimes she engaged her servants in various tasks. At
other times, she gave some pomegranate seeds to the
parrots and told them, “You should sing like me. Sing
this song: Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti, Govinda Dāmodara
Mādhaveti.”


                           10
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

Yaśodā Maiyā was not the only one who remembered Kṛṣṇa
while she performed her household duties. All the gopīs
(cowherd ladies) of Vraja always thought of Kṛṣṇa while
they were in their homes. They carried on their everyday
activities eagerly waiting for Him to come to their
houses and steal some butter.

They used to think, “He must surely come, and then,
somehow I will play a trick and catch hold of Him.” The
Vraja gopīs spent all their time serving Kṛṣṇa by
performing their activities in this mood.

Sometimes, at about seven in the morning, they would
stop what they were doing and gather together at
Yaśodā’s house. Why? To see Kṛṣṇa. He was so beautiful
that they had more love and affection for Him than they
had even for their own sons. They longed for Kṛṣṇa so
much: “Oh, we want Kṛṣṇa to be our son, so that we can
give Him our breast milk, and serve Him with so much
love and affection.”




Baby Wrestlers


All the gopīs felt this way, and the cows did, too!
Sometimes, the cows would come into the cowherd town of
Nandagrāma, and stand waiting. Then Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva
used to go out, and lie down on the ground beneath them,
and the cows udders would spontaneously pour milk into
Their mouths. The cows would think, “If only Kṛṣṇa were
my son! Then I could give Him my milk, and show Him my
love.” This mood was everywhere in Vraja.

Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva began growing up, and when They were
about one and a half years old, They could stand up, and
walk a little. Sometimes They fell down, as well. The
gopīs who came to see Them were divided into two
parties. One party took Baladeva’s side and the other
supported Kṛṣṇa. The gopīs on Kṛṣṇa’s side announced,
“Kṛṣṇa is so strong that He can defeat Baladeva.” Then
Baladeva Prabhu’s party would disagree: “No, no,
Baladeva is stronger than Kṛṣṇa.” The gopīs on Kṛṣṇa’s
side said, “If Kṛṣṇa defeats Baladeva, I will give Kṛṣṇa
a laḍḍu.“ And the gopīs in Baladeva Prabhu’s party said,
“If Baladeva wins this battle, then we will give
Baladeva a laḍḍu.”

Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva could understand what was going on,
and in this way, the gopīs inspired the two brothers to
wrestle with each other. Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva were naked,
and stood opposite each other. They began to slap Their
thighs and chests like adult wrestlers. Then They caught
hold of each other and tried to bring each other to the
ground. They were equally matched and sometimes Baladeva
would almost defeat Kṛṣṇa but then, Kṛṣṇa would turn
just in time to defeat Baladeva. Then Baladeva would
defeat Him. They were going on like this — back and
forth — and everyone would sing and clap to see the fun.
All the gopīs were overjoyed to see this play.


                           11
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017




Complaining in Love


As Kṛṣṇa grew older and bigger, He often wore only a
golden chain around His waist, which tinkled and jangled
as he walked. He always wondered, “Where is that sound
coming from?” He used to look here and there, not
realising that He was making the sound Himself.

The gopīs still came to see Kṛṣṇa, but now they came to
Yaśodā Ma to complain about her son: “Sometimes Kṛṣṇa
comes to our houses, and He steals our butter, even
though we have hidden it in different places. He has so
many friends — Sudāmā, Śrīdāmā, Subala, Madhumaṅgala —
and they’re always with Kṛṣṇa. They’re just like
mischievous little monkeys.” Kṛṣṇa’s baby friends were
all naked, and they were His constant companions.

When the gopīs came to Mother Yaśodā to complain about
Kṛṣṇa, they were not at all angry. On the contrary, they
felt sorry for Yaśodā. They thought, “Yaśodā is not as
fortunate as we are. Kṛṣṇa comes to our houses and plays
here and there, and steals things according to His own
sweet will; but He doesn’t steal things in His own
house, and He does not play so sweetly there. So Yaśodā
is not as fortunate as we are, because she doesn’t see
all these sweet pastimes. We are so blessed.” It seemed
as if they were coming to complain to Yaśodā. But
really, they were only pretending to complain, so they
could relish sharing stories about Kṛṣṇa, and let Yaśodā
know how sweet her son was.

Here are some of the stories that Yaśodā’s friends would
tell her: “Oh! Your boy has become so naughty! He enters
our houses, and plays so many mischievous tricks. He
steals our butter, and then He hands it out to his
friends, and even to the monkeys.

“Sometimes He makes a crafty plan, and tells one of His
friends, ‘You go to your mother, while we hide in the
shelter of a tree, or another good hiding place just
outside the house. Say to your mother, Oh, come quickly!
Someone has untied the calf’s tether, and it’s running
free. Now it’s taking its mother’s milk, and soon there
won’t be any left.’

“When the boy tells his mother, the gopī goes chasing
after the calf, and while she is away, Kṛṣṇa and His
friends enter her home, and steal butter and whatever
else they want.”

Sometimes a gopī would hide in her own house thinking,
“Kṛṣṇa must come, and then I will catch Him.” Sure
enough, Kṛṣṇa would creep in and put His hand in the pot
of butter. The gopī would suddenly pounce on Kṛṣṇa and
scold Him:

“Oh! You are stealing in my house?”

Kṛṣṇa would say, “Oh, Mother, I came here because I

                           12
Butter Thief.txt                                 5/2/2017

thought this was My home and you are My mother. It never
occurred to Me that you’re not My mother, and I
certainly didn’t think you’d catch hold of Me and beat
Me.” Saying this He smiled, and the gopī’s heart melted.
Although she had caught hold of Kṛṣṇa’s wrist, He
wrenched His hand free and ran away.




The Runaway Calf


One day a gopī told Mother Yaśodā, “Today, I caught your
son Kṛṣṇa in the act, with His hand right in a pot of
butter. I asked Him, ‘Why have You come here? Did You
come to steal butter?’

“‘No, no mother! I was searching for My calf. I was
playing with him today, and he ran away. So I followed
him, but he jumped into this pot.’

“Oh, your calf has jumped in this pot, has he?

“‘Yes, Mother’, your son replied very innocently. And
when He pulled His hand out of the butter pot, He was
holding a marble toy calf! Then He and His friends all
began to laugh, and they quickly ran away.”

Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He
always wants to please His devotees. Kṛṣṇa’s other
incarnations are not like He is. Everyone can worship
Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa Himself wants to worship His pure
devotees, serve them, and fulfil their desires. Kṛṣṇa’s
pure devotees in Vraja think, “I really want Kṛṣṇa to
come to my house and steal butter from me,” and that is
why Kṛṣṇa comes. Otherwise, Kṛṣṇa will never come to any
home.




Kṛṣṇa Only Accepts Love And Affection


Kṛṣṇa will only accept an offering that is made with
love and affection. One incident that shows this took
place many years later in Hastināpura.

It is well known that Arjuna and his four brothers were
Kṛṣṇa’s very dear friends and devotees. Duryodhana, who
also lived in Hastināpura, was the sworn enemy of Arjuna
and his brothers (later they fought each other at the
Battle of Kurukṣetra), but he wanted to invite Kṛṣṇa to
a feast. Duryodhana was very wealthy, so he served
preparations of delicious foodstuffs — such as Iaḍḍu,
perā, kachorī, sandeśa and mākhan — in golden dishes,
and water in golden cups. Then he requested Kṛṣṇa,
“Please come and take Your meal with Me.”

Kṛṣṇa objected, “I can’t eat anything, because I have no
appetite. I only eat anything where there is love and

                           13
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

affection, I can never eat with you, because you have no
love and affection for Me! I came to Hastināpura to ask
you to make peace with Arjuna and his brothers, but you
have not complied. How can I take My meal with you? I’m
not a beggar, and I’m not hungry.”




Delicious Banana Peels


Shortly after rejecting Duryodhana’s opulent feast,
Kṛṣṇa went to Vidura’s house. Vidura was Kṛṣṇa’s
devotee, and was also very affectionate to Arjuna and
his four brothers. In fact, on several occasions he had
saved them from great danger.

Because of this, Kṛṣṇa was very fond of Vidura. When
Kṛṣṇa got to Vidura’s house, Vidura was not there, so
Kṛṣṇa pleaded with his wife Vidurāṇī, “Oh, Vidurāṇī
Maiyā, I am so hungry! Please give Me something to eat.”
Vidurāṇī was very affectionate to Kṛṣṇa, and she was
anxious to serve Him. She began to offer Him bananas,
but in her confusion, she threw away the fruit and gave
Him the peels. Kṛṣṇa affectionately accepted the peels,
and relished them joyfully. They tasted sweeter to Him
than all the preparations and offerings made in Dvārakā
by his chief queens Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā.

While Kṛṣṇa was completely absorbed in accepting
Vidurāṇī’s offering of banana peels, Vidura came in. He
was astonished at what he saw, and exclaimed, “Oh,
Vidurāṇī! What are you doing?”

Kṛṣṇa tried to caution him, “Don’t speak to her. She is
not in her external senses. She is fully absorbed in
transcendental love and affection.” Vidurāṇī, however,
came back to external consciousness when she heard her
husband speak, and soon realised what was happening. She
then gave Kṛṣṇa the fruit of the bananas and threw away
the peels.

Kṛṣṇa was a little disappointed. “Oh! This fruit is not
as tasty as the peels were.”

From this pastime, we can see that Kṛṣṇa never becomes
hungry. He doesn’t want to taste banana, or sweets, or
milk or anything. He just wants to take the essence of
all the fruits.

What is that essence? It is simply love and affection,
the mood of bhakti in the offering. Kṛṣṇa will never
accept anything from someone who has no deep love and
affection for Him. On the other hand, He will forcibly
take what He wants from a devotee who has love and
affection for Him, if that devotee does not give Him
enough.

When Kṛṣṇa appeared in the form of His own devotee as
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, He used to quarrel with His dear
devotee Śrīdhara, and take the things that Śrīdhara was
selling.

                           14
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017


Śrīdhara used to protest, “No! I won’t give you these
things without payment! I’m a very poor person. You
shouldn’t take these things. Go and get them from
someone else.”

But Mahaprabhu used to take his banana flowers and other
items anyway. That is Kṛṣṇa’s nature. Kṛṣṇa is not a
beggar. He is full in all opulence, but still He comes
to Vraja to serve all His associates, and to play with
them.




Kṛṣṇa is Let Down


Now Kṛṣṇa became somewhat bigger. One day Yaśodā told
Him, “It’s Your birthday today. Go and bring a female
calf here and worship her.”

Kṛṣṇa became very happy. He went out and chose a very
beautiful she-calf. She was as white as a swan. The calf
was very healthy, stout and strong, and was jumping here
and there. Kṛṣṇa wanted to catch her, but couldn’t
because she was jumping so much. After a great struggle
He managed to catch hold of her, intending to bring her
into the courtyard. He tried to tie up her four legs,
but the calf refused to let Him, and they had another
wrestling match. Somehow or other, Kṛṣṇa managed to
bring her into the courtyard. As He was doing so, He
noticed a pot hanging from a rope. He immediately
understood that this pot was full of sweet butter. In an
instant, His intense greed for the butter made Him
forget that He was supposed to bring the calf in. But
how could He reach the butter? It was hanging high up in
the rafters, and there was no ladder or anything to
stand on.

When He was with His friends, He would climb on their
backs, one by one, higher and higher, until He could
reach the butter. However, none of His friends were with
Him, and He had no stick. What to do?

After considering carefully, Kṛṣṇa thought, “I can reach
the butter very easily if I stand on this calf.” He
climbed up on the calf’s back, and when He stood upright
He was just high enough to put His hand into the pot. At
that moment, the calf suddenly jumped away. Kṛṣṇa had
put His whole arm into the pot, so when the calf ran
away, He was left dangling there. Now He called out
fearfully, “O Mother! Mother! Mother!” and cried
bitterly.

Mother Yaśodā was churning butter, and when she heard
Kṛṣṇa weeping and crying for her, she smiled and ran out
to help Him. As soon as she saw Him hanging high above
the ground, she understood what had happened.

“You stay like that!” she told Him. “I’m not going to
touch You. And I’ll punish You for being naughty. I’ll
never help You!”

                           15
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017


Kṛṣṇa began to weep more loudly: “Mother! Mother!
Mother!” Of course, Yaśodā brought Him down. Kṛṣṇa was
charmingly mischievous in His boyhood, and that is why
He garnered so much love and affection from all the
gopīs, especially His mother.




Caught in the Act


One day, Yaśodā’s gopī friend told her a story about
Kṛṣṇa’s mischievous activities. “Early this morning,
Kṛṣṇa came to my house to steal butter. When He got
there, He saw that everything had been stored very
carefully, and there was no butter lying about for Him
to steal. My little baby son was asleep, but Kṛṣṇa
pinched him so much that he woke up and began to cry. If
we don’t keep butter in our houses for Him to steal,
then He will do such terrible things. And if He finds
butter and doesn’t like it, He breaks all the pots.”

When Yaśodā heard this story she thought, “I think that
Kṛṣṇa has become wayward, stealing butter in other
people’s houses. I must teach Him a good lesson.”

Meanwhile, her gopī friend thought, “Yaśodā doesn’t
really believe us when we tell her what her son has
done. I’ll wait for Kṛṣṇa in my house, and when He
comes, I’ll catch Him in the act, and take Him to
Yaśodā. Then she’ll see how naughty her boy is.”

In the very early morning, while it was still dark,
Kṛṣṇa came alone to the house. He was stealing butter
here and there, and thinking, “No one can catch me.”
However, that gopī was hidden from view, and waiting to
catch Him. When Kṛṣṇa came and ate her butter, she was
watching Him from her hiding-place. She pounced on Him,
and caught Him with butter still on his hands and mouth.
“Oh, I will take you to Mother Yaśodā!” she exclaimed in
great excitement. “Then she’ll have to believe us when
we tell her that her boy is a great thief.”

The gopī covered Kṛṣṇa with a shawl to take Him as a
captive to Yaśodā Maiyā. When she arrived at Yaśodā’s
house, she called out, “Oh Yaśodā! Oh Yaśodā! Just see!
I have caught your son stealing butter! He has become a
thief! You’ve never believed me up till now, but today
you’ll have to believe me.”

Yaśodā came out to meet her friend, and on the way, she
saw that Kṛṣṇa was asleep on the bed. Puzzled, she
asked, “Where is my son?” In response, the gopī took off
the cloth that she had used to wrap up Kṛṣṇa when she
caught Him. “Oh!” She was amazed to see that it was not
Kṛṣṇa, but her own son who was wrapped in the shawl!
Kṛṣṇa came out of the bedroom, and started weeping. “O
Mother! O Mother! Just see! They are all telling lies
about Me. I have never been to that house. They are all
liars! Now I will have to go and steal some butter!”


                           16
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017




CHAPTER THREE


Bound By Love


Yaśodā Maiyā’s Beauty


While Yaśodā performed her household chores, she
wondered how to satisfy Kṛṣṇa’s desire for butter. “All
the other gopīs prepare butter with their own hands to
give to Kṛṣṇa with love and affection,” she thought.
“Their butter is so sweet. Until now, I haven’t made
butter myself; my servants and maidservants have done it
for me. From now on, I’ll milk the cows with my own
hands, put the milk on the fire and then I’ll personally
make very sweet yoghurt from it. I’ll churn the yoghurt
myself, so that my butter will be very sweet and tasty,
and Kṛṣṇa will take it with great delight.”

Having made this decision, on the day of Diwali, Yaśodā
sent all her servants and maidservants to the house of
Nanda Bābā’s older brother, Upananda. She even sent
Rohiṇī Maiyā off with Baladeva, because there was no one
to help with the Diwali preparations at Rohiṇī’s palace.
At dawn, as the reddish sun rose in the peace and calm
of the early morning, Yaśodā was all alone, churning
yoghurt. Yaśodā was very beautiful. If she were not, how
could Kṛṣṇa be beautiful? The son cannot be so beautiful
if the mother is not.

How can we describe Yaśodā’s beauty? Her breasts were so
broad, that it seemed as if her slim waist would break
if she bent down. She wore fine silk clothes. In India
at that time, the art of making silk cloth was highly
developed. A standard cloth sari for a lady was about
ten yards. The weavers were so expert and the cloth so
fine, that a full sari could be pulled through a hole no
wider than one’s finger-nail. Yaśodā had put on
especially fine silken cloth for the Diwali festival,
and her feminine beauty shone through her clothing.

Mother Yaśodā prepared for churning by putting the pot
of yoghurt next to a pillar, and supported the churning
rod in the pot with thin ropes attached to the pillar.
She then began to churn by pulling on the ends of the
rope that was wrapped around the churning rod. She was
very beautiful, resourceful and intelligent. That is why
Kṛṣṇa was so attractive. If thousands of people were
watching His activities, He would completely capture
everyone’s attention.

What was Yaśodā’s mood while she was churning? She was
remembering the sweet childhood pastimes of Bāla Kṛṣṇa
and singing: “Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti, Govinda
Dāmodara Mādhaveti, Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti, Govinda
Dāmodara Mādhaveti.” Yaśodā was absorbed in singing, and
thinking of Kṛṣṇa. Her heart was melting, her eyes were
closed, and tears of love were flowing down her cheeks.

                           17
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017




Yaśodā’s Singing


When Vaiṣṇavas sing in glorification of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they
accompany themselves with a special drum called the
mṛdaṅga. The large end of the mṛdaṅga resounds deeply,
“Tan! Tan!” and the small end gives a high sound, “Dik!
Dik!” The singers also play small hand cymbals called
karatālas, which chime sweetly.

While Mother Yaśodā was singing and churning, the
rhythmic motion of the churning rod in the deep pot of
yoghurt made a sound like the drum: “Dik, dik, tan! Dik,
dik, tan!” At the same time, the golden chain on her
neck, and the bangles on her wrists chimed in time like
very sweet cymbals. Yaśodā was singing in time with the
sounds of her bangles and the yoghurt pot. The ‘Dik tan’
sound of the churning was singing, “Fie on those who
don’t worship Kṛṣṇa, and who don’t remember Kṛṣṇa! Fie
on them! Fie on them! Dik-tan! Dik-tan!”




Kṛṣṇa Searches for Yaśodā


Yaśodā was totally absorbed. In the meantime, Kṛṣṇa
awoke in the bed where He slept with His mother. His
eyes were still closed, but He was searching for His
mother with His hands, and whimpering softly: “Ma! Ma!
Ma!” When He found that His mother was not there, He
began to cry a little louder and rub His sleepy eyes
with His little fists. At first, there were no tears. He
just smeared the black kajal (eye-liner) that His mother
had applied to His big eyes, which were very long, like
the petals of a lotus flower.

When Kṛṣṇa could not find His mother, He began to weep:
“I’ve just woken up, and I’m so hungry, but Mother has
gone somewhere and left Me.” He cried, as babies do when
they want their mother. After a while, he heard the
sound of the churning and He realised that His mother
could not hear Him. “Oh, she’s over there churning,
‘Dik-tan!’ ‘Dik-tan!’ and she’s singing, ‘Govinda
Dāmodara Mādhaveti’, and that’s why she can’t hear Me.”

He began to cry more loudly, but still His mother did
not come. Now He wanted to climb down from the bed, but
it was high, so how could He get down? As the Supreme
Lord, He is limitless, and the whole universe is within
His body. However, playing the part of a small child, He
could hardly get down from His bed. Kṛṣṇa lay on His
stomach, put His feet over the side of the bed, and very
carefully began to let Himself down, feet first. Slowly
He slid off the bed until His feet touched the ground,
and then He began to walk towards His mother.


                            18
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

He was walking very unsteadily, staggering first to one
side and then to the other, because He was still quite
sleepy. He was crying, and tears were rolling down His
cheeks. His tears were white like the River Ganges, and
the streaks of smeared kajal (eye-liner) running down
His face were black like the River Yamunā. He was
weeping loudly now, but Yaśodā was so absorbed in her
own singing and churning, that she could not hear Him.

At last, baby Kṛṣṇa came right up to Yaśodā. He caught
hold of the churning stick with His left hand and the
end of her veil with His right hand. Yaśodā, still
absorbed, wondered, “What has stopped my churning?” Then
she looked down and saw her baby Kṛṣṇa.

“Oh, Kṛṣṇa has come, and He’s crying.”

Yaśodā stopped churning at once, and took Kṛṣṇa in her
lap. He was still weeping, so she wiped His tears with
her veil, and began to relieve Him of His distress. She
pacified Him, caressed Him, and put her breast in His
mouth.




Desperate Milk


Now Kṛṣṇa stopped crying, but Yaśodā began to softly
weep, and tears of love flowed gently down her cheeks.
At the same time, her hair began to stand on end in her
transcendental loving ecstasy. Advanced devotees
experience eight bodily symptoms of transcendental
ecstasy, and these symptoms all began to appear in
Yaśodā.

Tears poured profusely from her eyes, her body trembled,
and she began to perspire heavily. She was completely
absorbed in her ecstasy of transcendental maternal
affection for Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa was fully savouring that
love. Kṛṣṇa sucked Yaśodā’s breast for some time, but He
was still not satisfied, because He had been hungry for
a long while.

Meanwhile, Yaśodā looked at the pot of milk that she had
left heating, and saw that the milk was boiling over
into the fire. Yaśodā realised that this milk was also a
devotee, who was thinking, “I want to serve Kṛṣṇa, but
Kṛṣṇa’s stomach is so vast that it can contain the whole
universe, and there is enough milk in Yaśodā’s breasts
to fill millions of oceans. Kṛṣṇa’s appetite is
limitless, His stomach is limitless, and Yaśodā has an
endless supply of milk. If Kṛṣṇa takes Yaśodā’s milk for
millions of years, it will never be depleted. I will
never have a chance to serve Kṛṣṇa in this lifetime, so
what is the use of maintaining my life? It’s better if I
die now.” That is why the milk was boiling over into the
fire.




                           19
Butter Thief.txt                                5/2/2017


Gurudeva Engages Devotees


Wherever you find devotees, one symptom of their bhakti
is that they feel humble and inadequate in their service
to Kṛṣṇa: “My body, my mind and my senses are not
engaged in serving Kṛṣṇa. What is the use of my life?”

We are not thinking like these devotees because we do
not practice bhakti properly. When this intense desire
for service arises during one’s practice, Kṛṣṇa will
appear at once and award us His service. Or a devotee
like Yaśodā will come and give us a chance to serve
Kṛṣṇa.

When Yaśodā understood that this milk was desperately
jumping into the fire, she told it, “All right, I will
engage you in Kṛṣṇa’s service and I will serve Kṛṣṇa
afterwards.” A real bhakta — a guru like this — engages
newer and newer devotees in serving Kṛṣṇa. Gurudeva’s
service is to engage qualified souls — those who are
eager — in Kṛṣṇa’s service.

Yaśodā Maiyā is like a guru, teaching how to serve in
the mood of parental love for Kṛṣṇa. In order to help
the milk serve Kṛṣṇa, she had to put Kṛṣṇa down quickly,
and run to the fire. This is the guru’s inclination and
mood — to increase the service to Kṛṣṇa by engaging
others. It is the first duty. That is why Yaśodā Maiyā
wanted to put Kṛṣṇa aside.




Yaśodā Defeats Kṛṣṇa


Just after Kṛṣṇa was born, when He was only six days
old, a demoness called Pūtanā came to Vṛndāvana to try
to kill Him. She put poison on her breast, and took the
form of a very beautiful woman. When she offered her
breast to baby Kṛṣṇa, He began to suck out her life. The
demoness had the strength of many thousands of
elephants, but even though she tried to pull Kṛṣṇa from
her breast, she could not escape from His grasp, and she
died.

Now Kṛṣṇa was much older and stronger. When He saw that
Yaśodā wanted to put Him down, He caught hold of her
like a baby monkey. He wrapped His arms and legs tightly
around her body, and fastened His mouth on her breast.
All His senses were completely engaged, and He resolved,
“I won’t give up My position in Yaśodā’s lap!”

Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He
possesses the sum total of all opulence. He has the
power to defeat the whole world, including all sorts of
mighty demons such as Keśī, Agha, Baka, Pūtanā,
Hiraṇyakaśipu and Rāvaṇa. Still, He could not prevent
His mother from putting Him down! Yaśodā Maiyā defeated
Him without any difficulty.


                            20
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

“You should sit here,” she told Him, and despite Kṛṣṇa’s
best efforts, she quickly and easily lifted Him off her
lap with one hand, and put him down. Kṛṣṇa was helpless.
This is a good lesson for everyone. If anyone has such
deep and strong bhakti for Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa becomes like a
baby. By the arrangement of His pastime potency
Yogamāyā, His limitless power deserts Him, and He
becomes helpless.

Yaśodā left Kṛṣṇa, even though He wanted to keep
drinking her breast milk. He began to weep loudly and He
became angry: “She hasn’t satisfied My hunger, and yet
she has left Me to save that milk.”




The Servant of the Servant


It is clear from this pastime that those who serve Kṛṣṇa
also take care of the articles with which Kṛṣṇa is
served: the utensils, the clothes, the flute, the
peacock feather and all the paraphernalia. Yaśodā Maiyā
gave more attention to these than she did to Kṛṣṇa. Why?
This is the nature of the bhakta (devotee) in this
world. It is not so easy to understand, but there are
some examples that will help us.

Yaśodā would sometimes chastise Kṛṣṇa when He got mud
and earth on His clothes. “Oh, You are so naughty!” she
would say. “I have just washed Your clothes, and now
You’ve made them dirty again.”

Now, when the milk jumped into the fire, Yaśodā had to
put Kṛṣṇa aside to go and save it, even though Kṛṣṇa was
weeping. Why? What was so special about this milk? The
whole purpose of the milk was to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, but
Yaśodā’s priority was exactly the opposite: she was
ready to satisfy the milk before she satisfied Kṛṣṇa.

Why did she put Kṛṣṇa aside, and go to save the milk —
even though He wept when she did so? For the same reason
that she sometimes disciplined Him for making His
clothes dirty: the milk was for Kṛṣṇa’s service, just as
the clothes were for Kṛṣṇa’s service.

This is the nature of pure bhakti (transcendental
devotional service). Kṛṣṇa has more affection for those
who serve His bhakta (devotee) than He does for those
who serve Him directly. He becomes very pleased with the
servant of the devotee. We must try to understand this
concept; it is essential.

For example, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost
devotee, so Kṛṣṇa is more pleased with one who is
serving Her than He is with someone who is serving Him
directly. And if someone is serving Rūpa Mañjarī, who is
the servant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa will say, “You are
a servant of Rūpa Mañjarī? Oh, I shall give you
everything. What do you want?”

This is the nature of bhakti.

                             21
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017




Weakened by Love


Yaśodā went to save the milk, which was especially for
Kṛṣṇa. Yaśodā needed that milk, as well as her breast
milk. “My breast milk alone is not enough for Kṛṣṇa,”
she thought. “I can’t make sweet yoghurt from my milk,
and I cannot use my milk to make butter.” Since she
couldn’t make butter from her breast milk, it was
essential to save the milk in the pot from overflowing
into the fire, so off she went. But Kṛṣṇa was weeping.

Now, what should we understand if Kṛṣṇa is weeping? Is
He angry or not? Externally, it seems that He was angry,
but internally He was so happy — Oh! so happy — even
though He was weeping.

Kṛṣṇa then thought, “My mother has gone away and left Me
here without satisfying Me, so I will teach her a
lesson. I’ll get into mischief.” He stood up and tried
to upset a nearby vessel containing yoghurt, but He was
not strong enough to move it. Although He had previously
killed the witch Pūtanā, Yaśodā’s maternal love for Him
now made Him become like a small boy, and He was so weak
that He could not move the pot, or even shake it.

Where love and affection are prominent, Kṛṣṇa can forget
all His divine opulence, and everything to do with being
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is why He had
no strength to overturn the vessel, and was child-like
and weak.




Breaking The Yoghurt Pot


“What should I do?” Kṛṣṇa thought. “I can’t turn the pot
over, so I’ll try to break it. The top of the pot is
very thick, but the bottom is quite thin, so if I hit it
there with the pestle, it will break.” And that’s what
He did; He took the pestle and smashed a hole in the
bottom of the pot. A beautiful stream of white yoghurt
squirted out of the pot across the kitchen floor.

When Kṛṣṇa saw the yoghurt flowing everywhere, He was
delighted. He clapped His hands, and laughed. But the
next moment He thought, “Oh! If Mother sees Me, she will
punish Me.” He immediately became very fearful, and
decided that it was best to leave the scene of the
crime.

Kṛṣṇa left that room and went into an adjacent room. He
thought, “I will hide so that Mother will not find Me.”
By the influence of His pastime potency Yogamāyā, he was
playing the part of an ordinary small boy. Consequently,
He did not notice that after He had paddled in the

                           22
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

stream of yoghurt, He left a trail of very adorable
little footprints for His mother to follow.




Kṛṣṇa Rewards His Devotees


Kṛṣṇa went into the next room, and saw a grinding
mortar, above which a pot of butter hung in a swing.
When he saw the butter, His mouth watered. He climbed on
top of the grinding mortar, and took the butter and fed
it to the monkeys and crows, who had gathered in great
numbers. Kṛṣṇa was very happy. He thought, “In my
previous incarnation as Rāmacandra, the monkeys came and
helped Me when I was living in the forest. They worked
very hard day and night to build the bridge to Lanka. I
couldn’t feed them or satisfy them properly at that
time, but now I’ll give them this butter. These crows
have appeared in the dynasty of My very old and dear
servant Kakabhūṣaṇḍhi, so I will feed them as well.”

In the meantime, while Kṛṣṇa was joyfully feeding the
crows and monkeys, Mother Yaśodā came back to the room
where she had been sitting with Him, and saw the broken
pot of yoghurt. She followed the Butter Thief’s trail of
footprints, and approached the room where Kṛṣṇa was
feeding the monkeys.

This room had two doors, one coming from the inner rooms
of the house, and the other opening into the outer
courtyard. Kṛṣṇa had entered the room from the inner
compound, and now had His back towards it. Mother Yaśodā
came through this door, and began to carefully and
quietly sneak up on Him, like a cat walking silently on
dry leaves.

Kṛṣṇa did not notice His mother coming closer, but when
the monkeys and crows saw her, they began to scatter and
fly away in all directions. When Kṛṣṇa saw the birds and
monkeys leaving, at first He thought, “Oh, where are you
going?” Then He realised, “Aha! Someone else is in the
room!” As Yaśodā Maiyā was just about to catch Him, He
looked over His shoulder and saw her. “Oh, Maiyā is
coming!” Quickly He jumped down from the grinding
mortar, and began to run away.




The Zigzag Course Of The Absolute


Kṛṣṇa ran as fast as He could, and Yaśodā Maiyā began to
run after Him. “Oh, You friend of a monkey!” she called
after Him, “You come here!” Kṛṣṇa was running in a
zigzag way, and Mother Yaśodā could not run so fast
because of her heavy breasts and slim waist.

Kṛṣṇa was so nimble that it was difficult for her to run
after Him and catch Him. Still, He saw that she would

                             23
Butter Thief.txt                                5/2/2017

catch Him in the end, so He had an idea: “I won’t run
around the room; I’ll go outside.” In the Vedic culture,
ladies don’t appear in public places alone. Kṛṣṇa knew
that it would be very embarrassing for His mother to
chase Him in the street. He thought, “I will run outside
so that she won’t chase after Me.”




The Speed Of Love


Kṛṣṇa ran outside to escape his mother. Mother Yaśodā
came to the door and thought, “Oh! What to do?” She
looked left and right, and seeing that no one was
watching, quickly ran outside in pursuit of her naughty
son. With great effort, she finally caught the
mischievous Kṛṣṇa. Holding Him tightly with one hand,
she raised the stick she was carrying in her other hand.
Kṛṣṇa was so afraid of the stick, that He dodged this
way and that around her legs.

There is a good lesson here. We all want to capture
Kṛṣṇa by our love. When Kṛṣṇa was running away from
Yaśodā Maiyā, she had to run faster than Kṛṣṇa to catch
Him. Devotees should practice in such a way that their
love and affection surpasses Kṛṣṇa’s.

Kṛṣṇa has affection for His devotees and the devotees
have affection for their beloved Kṛṣṇa. If the love is
equal —if Kṛṣṇa loves the devotee as much as the devotee
loves Kṛṣṇa — then Kṛṣṇa will not be controlled.
However, if a devotee has more love and affection for
Kṛṣṇa than Kṛṣṇa has for her, that devotee can control
Him. Kṛṣṇa was very loving towards His mother, but
Mother Yaśodā has even more affection for Him, and that
is how she captured Him, by her love. This is the hidden
message in this story.




A Loving Quarrel


Mother Yaśodā held Kṛṣṇa, and began to scold Him. “I’ll
give You such a beating!” she threatened. “I know You go
from house to house to steal. You are a thief!”

Kṛṣṇa replied, “Oh! Why are you saying that I am a
thief? There is no thief in My dynasty, in the lineage
of my father Nanda Bābā. Perhaps there is a thief in
your dynasty.”

He was so cheeky. He had heard Yaśodā Maiyā and Nanda
Bābā talking about Mother Yaśodā’s forefather called
Cora Ghosh. Cora also means thief. Kṛṣṇa now remembered
that there was someone called Cora in his mother’s
dynasty. That is why He told Her, “There is no cora
(thief) in My dynasty, but there is a corain your
dynasty.”

                           24
Butter Thief.txt                                5/2/2017


“Why are you chastising me?” Kṛṣṇa protested innocently.
“What have I done?”

“How was the yoghurt pot broken?” His mother replied
angrily.

“That was the punishment of the Supreme Lord,” Kṛṣṇa
said.

“And who fed the butter to the monkeys?”

“He who made the monkeys, feeds the monkeys,” Kṛṣṇa
said.

Yaśodā Maiyā was a little angry, but she was laughing as
well. “Now tell me the truth!” she said. “Who broke the
yoghurt pot?”

Kṛṣṇa explained, “Oh Mother! You jumped up to pacify the
milk that was boiling over. When you rushed into the
kitchen, you were in such a hurry that your heavy ankle
bells hit the yoghurt pot and broke it. I haven’t done
anything.”

“Is that the truth? In that case, how is it that You
have butter all over Your face?”

Kṛṣṇa said, “Oh Maiyā! Every day a monkey comes and puts
his hand in the pot to eat the butter, but today I
caught him. He pulled his hand out of the pot and began
to run away, but the butter on his hand smeared all over
My face. Tell Me honestly, am I to blame for this? But
still you call Me a thief and you want to beat Me.”

“Oh! You are a liar,” she retorted.




Binding Kṛṣṇa with Love and Affection


Yaśodā Maiyā considered in her mind, “What shall I do?
My boy is so restless, that He might try to run away.
Besides, if I don’t punish Him for His misbehaviour, He
might become a bandit when He grows up. Then she came to
a decision and told Kṛṣṇa, “This grinding mortar helped
You to steal the butter, so I will punish You and Your
accomplice by tying You both together.”

Yaśodā Maiyā took a silk ribbon, which she used to tie
up her hair and tried to bind Kṛṣṇa to the mortar, but
it was short by the width of two fingers. Her servant
brought additional ropes, but surprisingly, when the
ropes were tied together, they were still two fingers
too short. Now her friends, who were happily witnessing
this amazing scene, began to bring ropes from their
homes. But no matter how many ropes they tied together,
the ropes were always two fingers short.

The gopīs were all laughing and clapping their hands.
They told Yaśodā Maiyā, “Oh dear friend, we have told

                           25
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

you that this boy possesses some extraordinary illusory
potency. He is more clever than the greatest of
thieves.” Yaśodā thought, “He is my child. He came from
my womb. It will be so embarrassing if I cannot bind
him.”

From early morning until noon, she tried again and again
to tie Kṛṣṇa. She was becoming more and more fatigued.
Her face was red, and she was breathing heavily. She was
perspiring, and the flowers were falling from her hair.
As long as Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
refused to be bound, Mother Yashoda’s persistent efforts
were fruitless.

Finally, Kṛṣṇa’s heart was touched by the sight of His
mother being so overwhelmed. Her desire to bind Him was
born of her intense love and desire for His well-being.
Kṛṣṇa agreed to become bound by that love.

His pastime potency Yogamāyā immediately expanded her
influence. Yaśodā Maiyā then took the same ribbon from
her hair that she had first used unsuccessfully, and now
very easily tied Kṛṣṇa. What is the significance of the
rope always being two fingers short? One finger
represents our own hard endeavours to practise
devotional service. The second finger represents Kṛṣṇa’s
mercy. When Kṛṣṇa sees our repeated and sincere
endeavour to serve Him, His heart melts with compassion.
At that time, by His causeless mercy, He allows himself
to be bound by the devotee’s prema (pure transcendental
love).




CHAPTER FOUR


A Flood Of Affection


Yaśodā’s Doubt


Having successfully bound Kṛṣṇa, Yaśodā Maiyā went into
the house to continue her household duties. She resumed
her churning, but her mind was distracted and upset,
thinking about her son who was now bound to the mortar.
“Why did I tie Him up?” she thought. “I should not have
done that. But actually, I was right to bind Him. If I
hadn’t, He would have done something even naughtier.”
Then again, she thought that she was not justified. “He
is so soft and sweet, and I have given Him too much
pain. No, not only to Him; I have given myself too much
pain as well. I have given too much trouble to my own
heart.

“What can I do? Kṛṣṇa is so angry, and I am afraid that
if I untie Him, He will go roaming all over Vraja, and I
won’t be able to control His movements. It’s best to let
Him remain there for the time being.” However, she was
not peaceful. She maintained a constant vigil from
inside the house to see what He was doing.

                           26
Butter Thief.txt                                5/2/2017




The Opposition Party


In the meantime, Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd friends had gathered
round, and they began to joke with Him. Since they were
laughing and clapping, Kṛṣṇa began to laugh with them.
The mixture of tears and black eye-liner that had run
down his face and body was now dry. In the company of
His friends, Kṛṣṇa became somewhat happy, and He forgot
what His mother had done. The boys said to each other,
“Why don’t we untie Kṛṣṇa’s ropes and free Him?” Kṛṣṇa
was enthusiastic. “Yes, yes! My hands won’t reach all
the way around the grinding mortar to untie the ropes,
so you should do it.” All His friends came one by one to
try, but the knot was so tight that none of them could
untie it. Still, they were trying, one after another.
When one was unsuccessful, the others would say, “Oh you
can’t untie it, but I can,” and then he would wrestle
the knot away from the others and try himself.

Each of them failed several times, but they still
persisted in pushing each other out of the way, and
trying yet again. Kṛṣṇa’s funny friend Madhumaṅgala was
especially determined. “You are all bogus! You have no
idea at all. I can untie it.” He quickly came forward,
pushing all the others out of the way, and tried
himself, but he also failed. All the others laughed at
him in great amusement.

Amidst all the clamour and hubbub, the boys were
thinking, “If Baladeva were here, He could untie Kṛṣṇa
in a moment. Then this would all be finished, and we
could do something else.”

Meanwhile, Mother Rohiṇī was coming with Baladeva
Prabhu. Baladeva found the boys playing with Kṛṣṇa in
the courtyard, and when He saw that Kṛṣṇa was tied up to
the grinding mortar, He became furious. “Who has done
this? I will certainly punish him!” He was so upset that
His eyes became reddish, and His hands were shaking with
rage. Then Subala came close to Him and whispered in His
ear, “Oh brother, don’t be so upset. Mother Yaśodā has
done this.”

“Maiyā did it? Oh. If she did it, I can’t do anything.”

Baladeva backed away thinking, “There must be some
reason behind all this.”




The Plan for Deliverance


While this was going on, Kṛṣṇa was thinking. He is all-
knowing, and He remembered a pastime that had taken
place in the previous millennium. “Now I recall how My

                           27
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

dear devotee Nārada cursed Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva.”
Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva were sons of the powerful
demigod Kuvera, who was a friend of Lord Śiva, and Śiva
is very near and dear to Kṛṣṇa, so there was a
relationship. The very exalted, saintly devotee Nārada
was also a friend of Kuvera.

One day, Nārada saw Kuvera’s two sons playing in a lake
with a number of beautiful young women from the heavenly
planets. The women and the two young demigods were
naked, and they were playing various games, such as
hide-and-seek. When Nārada approached, the women became
ashamed. Coming out of the water, they hastily put on
their clothes, and offered obeisances repentantly. The
two young men, however, were stubborn, and did not
change their behaviour. They were madly intoxicated from
drinking wine, and they began to brazenly abuse Nārada
and the girls. “Why has this madman come here? He is
completely ignorant. And you are all so faithless that
you left the lake when you saw him. Now the mood has
been completely spoiled.”

The young men stood in front of the great devotee Nārada
without any clothes on. They had lost their shame and
knowledge. They did not know how to respect a superior,
or a saintly person. Nārada saw that they were like dry
trees. He thought, “These young men are very near and
dear to Śivajī, so I should teach them a good lesson.”




A Strong Lesson


A person who has had a thorn under the skin knows what
pain is, but someone who has not experienced such pain
can give pain to others very easily, and without
remorse. We see that people can cut off a fish’s head,
and cut the throats of goats, cows and other animals,
just to eat their flesh. If anyone gives such hard-
hearted people even a little injection of awareness,
they can come to their senses and understand, “I should
not do this.” One who understands nature’s laws realises
that the pain of cutting one’s finger is simply the pain
that we have given to others coming back to us. We
should note the spelling of the word ‘meat’: M E A T. It
contains the words ‘me’ and ‘eat’: it means, “Those
whose flesh I eat will return to eat me.” Every action
has its reaction. If you abuse anyone, you will receive
abuse. If you give someone else a slap, someone will
slap you. Animals that have been slaughtered will
receive a human body, and will eat those who killed them
in their previous life. We should therefore avoid eating
meat and fish.

Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva had taken birth in an
aristocratic family, and they were very beautiful and
wealthy. They were also highly cultured and educated.
Such people often have so much opulence that they don’t
believe in God at all, and certainly don’t want to
perform bhajana of Kṛṣṇa and offer their hearts to Him
with devotion. They are puffed up with false ego,

                           28
Butter Thief.txt                                5/2/2017

thinking, “I am so educated and so beautiful. I come
from an aristocratic family; I am a brāhmaṇa I am very
wealthy.” Those who think like that can never do bhajana
of Kṛṣṇa.

Nārada understood how degraded the two young men had
become, and he decided to teach them a lesson. “You are
acting exactly like trees, standing naked, and not
caring for your superior. You are behaving in a
nonsensical way! You shall become trees.”

His words were very powerful! Maṇigrīva and Nalakūvara
immediately sensed that they were undergoing some trans-
formation; they were becoming trees. Quickly realising
how serious the situation was, they fell down at Nārada
Ṛṣi’s feet. “Oh, Nārada Ṛṣi, we never knew that you were
so powerful. We were always immersed in false ego. Now
we understand that Kṛṣṇa has given us this human body
for bhajana, so that we can realise who is God. We have
misused our time, always drinking and making merry.
Please be merciful to us. Surely it can’t be true that
we are going to be trees?”

Nārada said, “What I have said will certainly happen.
Once spoken, the intent of my words cannot be checked.
Still, I will mitigate the punishment, because you are
now realising how foolish you have been and you are the
sons of my friend. You will have to become two trees,
but you will be in Vṛndāvana. After some time, Kṛṣṇa
will appear in the neighbourhood where you are standing.
When He is playing as a boy, He will personally touch
you both, and then you will not only have liberation,
but bhakti as well.” Hearing his words, the two young
men became pacified and peaceful.




The Liberation of Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva


Kṛṣṇa remembered Nārada Ṛṣi’s prediction, and thought,
“I must fulfil My devotee’s desire.” Kṛṣṇa is so expert,
that He can accomplish many goals and fulfil many
desires with one action. Kṛṣṇa immediately asked His
friends to push the grinding mortar out of Nanda Bābā’s
compound, and they began to push it and pull it towards
the gate. Just outside the main gate were two very tall
arjuna trees. These trees cast cooling shade over a wide
area, and thousands of birds were taking shelter in
their broad branches.

The two trees stood close together, with only a narrow
passageway between them. Kṛṣṇa crawled through the
narrow passage between the two trees, but the grinding
mortar was wider than He was. As the cowherd boys pushed
and pulled, it became stuck between the two trees. When
the mortar touched the trees, they became connected to
Kṛṣṇa. It was as if a current flowed from Kṛṣṇa through
the rope to the mortar and from the mortar to the two
arjuna trees. Anyone who touched the mortar would
receive that transcendental current.


                           29
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

As Kṛṣṇa continued to pull at the mortar, by Nārada’s
grace, the two trees surrendered to Kṛṣṇa’s touch, and
fell with a tremendous crash. Kṛṣṇa’s friends had been
playing with Him, pulling, shouting, and joking happily.
But when the trees unexpectedly fell, the boys became
very frightened. What had happened? As the trees toppled
over, the two beautiful demigods appeared before Kṛṣṇa.
They offered prayers and obeisances to Him, and He
blessed them that they would both go to His eternal
abode, where they would sing about His wonderful
pastimes. They circled Kṛṣṇa with folded palms, and then
proceeded to their glorious destination.




Yaśodā’s Fear And Shock


The whole of Vraja trembled with the sound of the arjuna
trees falling, and all the inhabitants of Vraja ran
towards the terrible noise from wherever they were.

Meanwhile, Mother Yaśodā had been restless, and unable
to concentrate on what she was doing. She became very
fearful when she heard the frightful sound. “Where is
that sound coming from? Oh! It is very close to where
Kṛṣṇa is — very close.” Her heart began to pound with
fear, and at once she began running toward the source of
the sound. All the other residents of Vraja came
quickly. When they arrived at the spot, they were deeply
relieved and thankful at their good fortune.

The trees had fallen to the left and right of Kṛṣṇa, and
not on Him, so He was not even slightly hurt. Still,
they were afraid. Yaśodā saw it all from a distance.
“Oh, those two trees have been uprooted, and Kṛṣṇa is in
the middle. What would have happened if they had fallen
on Him?” She could not bear to think of anything at all
after this, and became completely stunned, with no sense
at all — just like dry wood. There were no tears, and
she was not even breathing. She just stood there like a
pillar.




Nanda Bābā Releases the Supreme


Nanda Bābā had been bathing in Brahmāṇḍa-ghāṭa, and he
also came running to see what had caused that sound.
When he saw Kṛṣṇa tied to the grinding mortar, he was
dumbstruck and angry. He took Kṛṣṇa in his lap and asked
Him, “Who did this?”

Meanwhile, the small boys gathered around and clamoured,
“Bābā! Bābā! Bābā! Kṛṣṇa touched the two trees and they
were uprooted. Two very beautiful people like gods or
sunrays came out of the trees. They began to pray, and
Kṛṣṇa said something to them. Then they walked around
Kṛṣṇa, fell flat on the ground in front of Him, and left

                           30
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

to the North.”

Nanda Bābā did not believe them. “These boys are so
simple,” he thought. “How could Kṛṣṇa uproot two great
trees? Maybe those two were demons sent by Kaṁsa to kill
Kṛṣṇa. Suddenly he considered the unthinkable: “What
would have happened if Kṛṣṇa had been killed?” He could
not think any more after that.

Just after the trees had fallen down, Kṛṣṇa had been
laughing happily. However, when He saw Nanda Bābā coming
in the distance, He began to weep more and more loudly.
When Nanda Bābā arrived, Kṛṣṇa told him piteously,
“Mother said she would beat Me!” He was sobbing now,
catching long breaths between His speech and His cries.
Nanda Bābā tried to pacify Him, but Kṛṣṇa wept even
more. Nanda Bābā wiped Kṛṣṇa’s tears with his shawl and
asked him, “My dear son, who tied You up?” But Kṛṣṇa
would not tell him.

Nanda Bābā repeated, “Who tied You up? Tell me! I will
punish whoever it was.”

He kept asking again and again, as he untied the knots
in the rope binding Kṛṣṇa to the mortar. Finally, Kṛṣṇa
put His mouth very close to Nanda’s ear and whispered,
“Mother tied Me.”

Nanda Bābā was astonished by Kṛṣṇa’s revelation. “Your
mother tied you up? Oh! I never knew that she was so
cruel-hearted.”

He gave Kṛṣṇa a laḍḍu, and Kṛṣṇa took it in His hand,
but He did not eat it. Still, He was pacified a little,
and the tears had almost stopped, although not
completely. Nanda Bābā caressed Kṛṣṇa’s head and body,
and Kṛṣṇa became very grave, looking at Mother Yaśodā
with fearful eyes.

Mother Yaśodā was not in external consciousness. She sat
motionless, and her gopī friends waited around her. They
could read Yaśodā’s heart, and they were deeply unhappy.
How they wished that Kṛṣṇa would come to Yaśodā’s lap.
Nanda Bābā looked very grave now. He took Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva on his shoulders — Baladeva on his right
shoulder and Kṛṣṇa on his left shoulder — and went to
Brahmāṇḍa-ghāṭa to bathe in the Yamunā. He, Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva bathed at the ghāṭa so that they would be
purified after this inauspicious event.

Then he lifted Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva onto his shoulders and
returned home. It was well after midday, but no one had
cooked anything at Yaśodā’s house that day. Who would
cook? Yaśodā and her friends were so upset that they
were just staring into space. None of them had even
thought of cooking, much less eating.




A Meal in the Cow Barn



                           31
Butter Thief.txt                                5/2/2017

When Mother Rohiṇī saw Nanda Bābā coming with the two
boys, she quickly went to the kitchen and cooked a
little sweet porridge. She gave it to Nanda Bābā, and he
fed the boys — first Baladeva, and then Kṛṣṇa. When They
were satisfied, he began to take a little himself. He
was still very grave, but he ate something, and then
went outdoors.

Homes in India — especially the homes of wealthy people
— are divided into two parts. The inner part of the
house is reserved for the ladies, and it contains the
kitchen and other rooms where they do the household
work. The outer part is for the men, and it has a
courtyard or meeting hall, as well as a drying-room,
where clothes can dry without being stolen by the
monkeys. It was to these outer quarters that Nanda Bābā
went now.

The afternoon passed, and it was time for the evening
meal. Still nobody had cooked, so Nanda Bābā went to the
cows’ barn with the boys. There he milked the cows
directly into the mouths of Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva, and gave
Them some sugar-candy. The two boys ate and drank until
Their stomachs were full, and then Nanda Bābā returned
home with Them. By that time, it was night.




“Bring Kṛṣṇa to Yaśodā Maiyā”


By now, all of Yaśodā’s friends — especially Rohiṇī and
Upananda’s wife - were very worried. All the older
ladies came with Mother Rohiṇī to where Nanda Bābā was
sitting with Baladeva and Kṛṣṇa in his lap.

The older gopīs said to Baladeva, “You are stronger than
Kṛṣṇa, and He will listen to You because You are His
older brother. Quickly, take Him straight to Yaśodā
Maiyā’s lap.” Baladeva went to pull Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa
gave Him such a strong push that Baladeva fell down.
Kṛṣṇa wrapped His arms tightly around Nanda Bābā’s neck.
Rohiṇī said, “O King Nanda! Kṛṣṇa’s mother has not taken
anything to eat. She is sitting in a corner as still and
silent as stone. All the gopīs in the house are so sad,
and they are also sitting silently, without eating or
drinking.”

“What can I do?” said Nanda Bābā. “She should realise
that this is the result of her anger. She has acted
cruelly.” Tears flowed from the eyes of the elderly
gopīs. “Alas! Alas! You shouldn’t call her cruel. It’s
not right to use a word like that for her. She is
extremely soft, both inside and out.”

Hearing this, King Nanda became more emotional. “Lāla!
Will You go to Maiyā?”

“No! No! I will stay with you,” replied Kṛṣṇa
emphatically.

“I’ll Stay With Father!”

                           32
Butter Thief.txt                                5/2/2017


Then Rohiṇī Maiyā came to Kṛṣṇa, “Kṛṣṇa, where will You
spend the night? Where will you sleep?”

“I’ll sleep with Father.”

“Not with Your Mother?”

“No.”

Upananda’s wife said, “You may stay with Bābā, but what
will you eat? Who will breastfeed You?”

“I will drink milk straight from the udders of the cows.
My Bābā will give it to Me, and he will give Me sugar
candy, too.”

“Who will You play with?”

“I will play with My brother and Nanda Bābā.”

“Won’t You go to Your Mother?”

“No, I will never go to her.”

Nanda Bābā said, “Why don’t You go to Rohiṇī Maiyā?”

Kṛṣṇa sobbed and declared angrily, “I was calling out to
my mother to come and untie Me, but she didn’t come, and
Rohiṇī Maiyā didn’t come either.”

When Rohiṇī heard this, tears flowed down her face, and
she said softly, “Lāla! Don’t be so cruel-hearted. Your
mother is crying for You.”

Kṛṣṇa’s eyes brimmed with tears when He heard this. He
turned around, and looked at his father’s face. A shower
of tears began to fall from Bābā’s eyes as well. “Lāla!
Should I slap your mother?” Nanda asked Kṛṣṇa. He raised
his hands and made a gesture as if he were beating
someone. Kṛṣṇa could not tolerate this, and He caught
hold of His father’s hands. At that moment, Nanda Bābā
remembered the anguish in Yaśodā’s heart.

Then Rohiṇī Maiyā said to Kṛṣṇa, “And what if your
mother…? She paused and snapped her fingers above her
head, as if to say, “What if she passes away?”

Oh! Seeing this, Kṛṣṇa became very anxious. He began to
cry out loudly, “Oh, Mother! Mother!” He jumped down off
His father’s lap, and began to run towards His mother
with outstretched arms. Rohiṇī Maiyā was weeping.
Picking up Kṛṣṇa — who was also crying — she quickly
took Him into the ladies’ quarters, and placed Him in
Mother Yaśodā’s lap.

Until now, Mother Yaśodā had been as senseless as a
statue, but when Rohiṇī Maiyā placed Kṛṣṇa in her lap,
she came to life and became very relieved.

“My dear son! My dear son!” she cried again and again.
Trembling, and with her heart melting, she covered Kṛṣṇa
with her veil and began weeping and weeping like a
kurarī bird.

                            33
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017


Kṛṣṇa began consoling her. “Mother! Mother! Mother!”
Rohiṇī Maiyā and all the other gopīs had gathered there
by this time, and they all began to weep and cry loudly.
Yaśodā was weeping; Kṛṣṇa was weeping; Rohiṇī was
weeping; and all the gopīs were weeping. In the meeting
room, Nanda Bābā was weeping as well. Everyone was
weeping, and the whole area was over-flooded with the
condensed moods of parental love and affection.

After some time, when Yaśodā was somewhat pacified, she
gave Kṛṣṇa her breast, and in the meantime, some food
was prepared. Nanda Bābā was quickly called to take his
meal and he sat down, with Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva to his
left and his right. Nanda Bābā said, “Kṛṣṇa, go and call
your Mother. If she doesn’t come, I will not take
anything.” Yaśodā was so ashamed and embarrassed that
she would not come, but Kṛṣṇa caught hold of her veil
and pulled, so she could not resist, and He brought her
to Nanda Bābā. Nanda Bābā ate his meal, gave some to
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, and left some remnants which were
distributed to everyone in Yaśodā’s house. Kṛṣṇa was now
sitting in Yaśodā’s lap, and that night, He slept with
her very peacefully.

Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, performs so
many sweet pastimes. Why? To enhance the love and
affection of those who love Him dearly.




CHAPTER FIVE


The Glorious Fruit-Seller


Attracted by Nanda-Nandana


At the same time that Śrī Kṛṣṇa was performing His
pastimes in Vṛndāvana, there was a lady in the nearby
city of Mathurā who used to sell exceptionally sweet
fruits. She would go to the country villages where small
children lived and walk through the narrow lanes calling
out, “Mangos! Oranges! Bananas! Guava!” She had such
lovely, ripe fruits, that many children would run to
her, and ask for them in a beautiful way.

They would all collect around her, and watch her with
greedy eyes, saying, “Mother, mother! I want to take
that fruit.” She was very popular with the children. One
day, this fruit-seller lady heard the name Nanda-
nandana, which means ‘the son of Nanda’, and she became
very much attracted. Someone told her, “Yaśodā has given
birth to a very lovely boy, and His name is Kṛṣṇa. He is
so beautiful and so attractive, that those who go to
Gokula and see Him just once, cannot think of anything
else. They give their minds and hearts to that boy and
return home without them.” When the fruit-seller heard
this, she wanted to see that boy.


                             34
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017




Calling Out To Kṛṣṇa


One day she took a basketful of fruits, and with some
difficulty crossed the river Yamunā in a makeshift boat
made of branches and banana trees. Then she set off for
Gokula, which was only seven miles from where she had
crossed the Yamunā.

The fruit-seller went to Gokula, and began calling out
to attract people to buy her fruits. She wanted to call
out, “Fruit! Bananas! Mangos! Oranges! Guava!” but she
was thinking of Kṛṣṇa, so instead she called out,
“Govinda, Dāmodara, Mādhaveti, Govinda, Dāmodara,
Mādhaveti.”

She began to cry out more loudly, “Govinda! Dāmodara!
Mādhava!” as she walked along with her basket on her
head. Indian ladies can carry baskets on their heads
without touching them with their hands. They can carry
two, three, or even four pots of water stacked on top of
their heads without holding them. Vrajagopīs are expert
in this.

The fruit-seller went on like this, her heart crying,
“Kṛṣṇa! Govinda! Dāmodara!” For the whole day she made
the rounds in Nandagrāma, where Kṛṣṇa lived with His
parents, but Kṛṣṇa did not come. She returned the next
day, and the next, but she still did not see Him.




The Fruit-Seller’s Vow


After the third day, she vowed, “If Kṛṣṇa does not allow
me to see Him today, I will not return. I will just give
up my life.” With this conviction, she was so absorbed
in singing, “Govinda! Dāmodara! Mādhava!” that Kṛṣṇa
could not check Himself when He heard her calling. He
was sitting in Mother Yaśodā’s lap, but He quickly
jumped off to go to the fruit-seller.

Kṛṣṇa had seen adults bartering, and He knew that the
fruit-seller would give Him some fruit, if He gave her
something in return. On the way out, He saw a sack of
grains, and He picked some up in His little hands, and
ran into the courtyard. “Oh, I want some fruits, I want
some! Give Me fruits!”

This fruit-seller was from a lower class, so she was
waiting outside the gate. She could not come into Mother
Yaśodā’s house, or even into the courtyard. Although
Kṛṣṇa had tried to bring some grains for bartering, His
little hands would not hold many, and most of the grains
that He had picked up fell to the ground as He ran out.
There were only a few grains left, but Kṛṣṇa did not
notice this; He thought that His hands were so full of

                           35
Butter Thief.txt                                 5/2/2017

grains that the fruit-seller would give Him plenty of
fruit.




Kṛṣṇa Reciprocates His Devotee’s Love


When the fruit-seller saw Kṛṣṇa, she became completely
captivated by the wonderful sight. She just sat looking
and looking at Him. In a moment, she had given her heart
to Kṛṣṇa.

“Give Me fruits! Give Me fruits!” Kṛṣṇa told her.

“What will You give me in return?”

“I’ve brought lots of grains with Me.”

The fruit-seller smiled and said, “Oh Boy, there are no
grains in Your hands.”

Kṛṣṇa looked at His hands, and was   surprised to see that
all the grains were gone. He still   wanted the fruits,
though. The fruit-seller looked at   Kṛṣṇa’s face, and
said, “If you call me ‘Mother’ and   sit on my lap, I will
give You all the fruits You want.”

Kṛṣṇa looked up and down, this way and that, to see if
anyone was watching. He is very affectionate to all His
devotees, and is not even slightly concerned what caste
or class they are born in. Still, He was playing the
part of the son of the King of Vraja. “I don’t know what
will happen if My mother or anyone in Vraja sees Me
sitting on the lap of this lady,” He thought. “And what
would My friends say if they found out that I had called
Her ‘Mother’?” That’s why He was looking here and there,
to see if anyone was watching. When He saw that no one
else was around, He quickly jumped onto the lady’s lap
and said, “Mother!” Then just as quickly, He jumped off
of her lap and demanded, “Now, you should give Me some
fruits.”

The fruit-seller lady was delighted. Kṛṣṇa had fulfilled
all of her desires. She wanted to give Him everything —
all of her fruits — but His hands were so small that He
could only take two mangos and a banana. He held the
fruits against His chest with both hands, and went off
dancing, as small boys do.

Kṛṣṇa went to his mother and put all the fruits in her
veil. She began to distribute them to her friends, and
she became so happy, for there was an endless and
inexhaustible supply. She gave fruits to all the gopīs,
and when everyone had received fruits, there were still
fruits left.

And what happened to that fruit seller? When Kṛṣṇa sat
on her lap and called her ‘Mother’, she was overcome
with transcendental sentiments and emotions. She had
given her whole heart and mind to Kṛṣṇa. She didn’t move
for a long time, but sat there outside the gate,

                           36
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

motionless in disbelief. When someone approached her and
asked. “Why are you just sitting here?” she did not
reply; she couldn’t.




A Basket Of Jewels


Eventually, towards evening-time, the fruit-seller took
her basket on her head, and started for home. When she
came to the banks of the Yamunā River, she thought, “My
basket is so heavy. What is in it?” When she put the
basket down and looked into it, she was amazed at what
she saw. The basket was filled with wonderful jewels,
each one equal in value to the whole of King Kaṁsa’s
treasury.

The fruit-seller was completely fixed in her meditation
on Kṛṣṇa. Standing on the bank of the Yamunā, she cried
out, “What is the use of all these jewels?” Then she
threw them all into the Yamunā, and with her hands above
her head, she began to sing like a mad woman, “Govinda
Dāmodara Mādhaveti, Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti.”

She had no veil — it had come off. She collapsed, and
fell on the earth, weeping. She had no sense — only the
sense that Kṛṣṇa was there. Tears were pouring from her
eyes, and her heart was melting. No one knew where she
went after that, for she never returned to her house.
Where had she gone? Can anyone say? Kṛṣṇa knew her heart
completely. He thought, “Oh, she would like to be My
mother!” He gave her a very beautiful spiritual body and
quickly took her to His supreme abode, Goloka Vṛndāvana,
where she could be like His mother eternally. Only her
material body was left lying on the banks of the Yamunā,
and someone came and gave it to fire.




Singing From The Heart


It is very wonderful to follow that fruit-seller, if you
want to. Your Gurudeva has come to give you this, to
sprinkle this mercy. You cannot repay him with wealth,
or reputation, or anything of this world. You have
nothing that you can to give to Gurudeva that could
repay him. You should meditate on Śrī Guru’s glory, and
try to understand who he is. He wants to give you the
same wealth that Kṛṣṇa gave to that fruit-seller, so try
to take what he wants to give you. Don’t waste your
valuable time, and don’t waste this valuable human body.
At once, from this moment, you should try to be like
that most fortunate fruit seller, always absorbed in
thoughts of Kṛṣṇa, and always singing, Govinda Dāmodara
Mādhaveti, Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti, Govinda Dāmodara
Mādhaveti, Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti.

How should you sing? Not as if you are singing an

                           37
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

ordinary song. You should pray to Kṛṣṇa with all your
heart, and then Kṛṣṇa will hear. Otherwise, you may be
singing like a professional. Kṛṣṇa doesn’t need that
kind of music. He already knows many songs. He wants
your heart. An inferior devotee may be able to sing
expertly, but Kṛṣṇa wants more.

Try to pray like this — with your full heart — and Kṛṣṇa
will hear. However you chant, whatever kīrtana you sing,
you should be absorbed in it. If you are singing just to
make music, Kṛṣṇa will not hear, but if you are chanting
and hearing in a heartfelt way, Kṛṣṇa will come at once,
and give you His wealth.




About Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


On the sacred and auspicious day of Maunī Amāvasyā,
1921, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
took his divine birth in a devout Vaiṣṇava family in
Tivārīpura, in the state of Bihar, India.

In February, 1946, he met his gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and his life of
complete and exemplary dedication to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism,
or the path of kṛṣṇa-bhakti in the line of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, began to manifest.

He accompanied his gurudeva on his extensive preaching
tours throughout India, actively assisting him in
propagating the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu for
the eternal benefit of the living entities in this
world. This included regularly hosting the thousands of
pilgrims attending the yearly circumambulation of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, the appear-ance place of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the appearance
place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

His gurudeva had instructed him to translate the
writings of prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas into Hindi, a
task he assiduously assumed throughout his entire life
and which resulted in the publication of nearly fifty
Hindi sacred texts. Later, most of these invaluable
masterpieces were translated into English and other
major languages of the world.

For many years, he traveled throughout India to spread
the message of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, and it was for this
end, also, that in 1996, he journeyed abroad. During the
next fourteen years, he circled the globe more than
thirty times. Whether he was in India or abroad, his
preaching always bore the distinctive characteristic of
boldly unmasking any misconception obscuring the
specific purposes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s advent,
in strict adherence to the desire of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda and in
perfect congruence with the conceptions of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s foremost follower.
Thus, in present times, in upholding the glorious tenets
of the Gauḍīya sampradāya, he performed the function of

                           38
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

a true ācārya.

At the age of ninety years, on December 29, 2010, he
concluded his pastimes in this world at Cakratīrtha, in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma. The following day, in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, Śrī Gaurasundara’s fully empowered
emissary, the very embodiment of His unique compassion,
was given samādhi. He will never cease to reside in his
divine instructions and in the hearts of those who are
devoted to him.




English titles published by

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


Arcana-dīpikā • Beyond Nīrvāṇa • Bhagavad-gītā •
Bhajana-rahasya • Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindu-bindu • Bhakti-
rasāyana • Bhakti-tattva-viveka • Brahma-saṁhitā •
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Vol. 2.1)• Butter Thief • Caitanya
Mahāprabhu – The Original Form of Godhead • Camatkāra-
candrikā – A Moonbeam of Complete Astonishment •
Controlled by Love • Dāmodara-līlā-mādhurī •
Dāmodarāṣṭakam • Discerning the True Sentiments of the
Soul • Distinctive Contribution of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī •
Essence of All Advice • Essence of Bhagavad-gītā •
Eternal Function of the Soul • Fearless Prince • Five
Essential Essays • Gauḍīya Gītī-Guccha • Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism versus Sahajiyāism • Gaura-vāṇī Pracāriṇe •
Gift of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu • Gīta-govinda • Going
Beyond Vaikuṇṭha • Gopī-gīta • Guru-devatātmā •
Happiness in a Fool’s Paradise • Harināma Mahā-mantra •
Harmony • Hidden Path of Devotion • Impressions of
Bhakti • Jaiva-dharma • Journey of the Soul • Letters
From America • Maharṣi Durvāsā and Śrī Durvāsā-āśrama •
Manaḥ-śikṣa • My Śikṣā-guru and Priya-bandhu •
Navadvīpa-dhāma Māhātmya • Navadvīpa-dhāma Parikramā •
Nectar of Govinda-līlā • Origin of Ratha-yātrā • Our
Eternal Nature • Our Gurus: One in Siddhanta, One at
Heart • Pinnacle of Devotion • Prabandhāvalī • Prema-
sampuṭa • Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā • Rāga-vartma-
candrikā • Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda • Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ
• Secrets of the Undiscovered Self • Secret Truths of
the Bhāgavatam • Shower of Love • Śikṣāṣṭaka • Śiva-
tattva • Ślokāmṛtam • Ślokāmṛtam-bindu • Soul of Book
Distribution • Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
– His Life and Teachings • Their Lasting Relation • To
Be Controlled by Love • True Conception of Guru-tattva •
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa • Upadeśāmṛta • Utkalikā-vallarī
• Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā • Veṇu-gīta • Śrī Vraja-
maṇḍala Parikramā • Walking with a Saint (2007, 2008,
2009) • Way of Love • Rays of the Harmonist (periodical)




Gaudiya Vedanta Publications (GVP)



                              39
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017

publishes, preserves and distributes the books of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. For more
information on the contents of these books, please
visit:




www.purebhakti.com

for news, updates, and free downloads of books, lectures
and bhajanas.




www.purebhakti.tv

to watch and hear classes online, or get links and
scheduled updates for live webcasts




www.harikatha.com

to receive, by email, the lectures and videos of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja on his
world tours




If you are interested to know more about the books,
lectures, audio recordings, videos, teachings, and the
international society of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, please contact us at

connectwithussoon@gmail.com




or find a center in your area on

www.purebhakti.com/contact-us




YOUR COMMENTS AND FEEDBACK

We humbly invite our readers to submit any errors they
may find in this publication at

www.purebhakti.com/gvp



                              40
Butter Thief.txt                               5/2/2017




YOUR SUPPORT

If you would like to support GVP’s publication,
preservation and distribution of Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s books, you
can:




sponsor the endowment fund of a printed book will assure
that when a book is first printed, there will always be
funding to keep that book in print. For more
information, please visit

www.mygvp.com




sponsor books for the GVP Book Distribution Program.
This program is a federally approved 501 c3 non-profit
religious organization that places Śrīla Gurudeva’s
books in stores, libraries, prisons, hospitals, and many
other locations. It makes the books available to all
people at no cost or low cost. For more information,
please visit

www.gvpbookdistribution.com




                              41
