Fearless_Prince_The.txt                         5/5/2017

The Fearless Prince



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Tags: The Fearless Prince Prahlad Mahārāja

The Fearless Prince Prahlad Mahārājattt



* * *




* * *




The Fearless Prince



The Story of Prahlad Maharaj

from Shrimad-Bhagavatam, Seventh Canto



compiled from lectures by



Shri Shrimad Bhaktivedanta Narayan Goswami Maharaj



Shri Keshav-ji Gaudiya Math

Mathura, U.P. 281001, India



Contents

Foreword

The Lord’s Grandeur

Prahlad’s Demoniac Father

Teach My Boy to Be Just like Me

Hiranya-kashipu’s Fury


                              1
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                           5/5/2017

Fixed in Higher Consciousness

Futile Attempts to Kill Prahlad

Back to School

Prahlad’s Instruction — Start Right Now!

Material Life Is Temporary

Devotion to Krishna Brings Real Happiness

Prahlad Convinces the Sons of the Demons

The Startling Appearance of Lord Narasingha-dev

The Lord’s Love for Prahlad

Prahlad’s Humble Prayer — Please Liberate All

Unwavering Faith — The Source of Prahlad's Strength




Foreword




The Vedic scriptures of India are the original
literatures of the planet. Recorded 5,000 years ago by a
partial incarnation of Godhead, Shrila Veda Vyasa, they
give complete knowledge of both the material and
spiritual realms. These ancient texts are extremely
vast, and amongst them Shrimad-Bhagavatam is accepted as
the cream. This sublime literature presents the highest
truths, explaining that the purpose of human life and
the path to achieving real, lasting happiness are found
in one-pointed, unmotivated devotional service to the
Supreme Lord Shri Krishna. Shrimad-Bhagavatam
emphatically declares Shri Krishna to be the original
form of Godhead – the eternally existing, eternally
youthful person and the source of all that be. From Him
come many incarnations who, throughout the ages, descend
to this planet in a great variety of forms to bless His
devotees and to engage in different types of pastimes
with them. The wonderful and astonishing pastimes of
these partial expansions of the Lord are described in
this ancient text. Shrimad-Bhagavatam culminates with
the Tenth Canto’s narrative of the sweet pastimes Lord
Shri Krishna performed when He came to this planet 5,000
years ago.

A much earlier history, which took place millions of
years ago, is the famous and exciting episode of Lord
Narasingha-dev – the half-lion, half-man incarnation –
who came to save the small boy, Prahlad Maharaj. Prahlad
was born into a family of big demons, his father and
uncle being highly inimical to Shri Krishna. Prahlad,
however, much to his father’s consternation, was a pure
devotee of the Supreme Godhead, who is also known as
Vishnu, the all-pervasive Lord of the cosmic

                              2
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

manifestation. Even as a small boy Prahlad’s character
was exemplary, demonstrating all the good qualities a
human being can have. He was humble, tolerant and never
envious of others. He was not disturbed when put into
danger, and because he was completely devoid of material
desires, he considered everything material to be
insignificant. Therefore, because his senses were always
under control and his intelligence remained steady, he
was never plagued by any type of unsavory passions.

His father, Hiranya-kashipu, on the other hand,
possessed a demoniac nature, and his father’s twin
brother, Hiranyaksha, was equally vile. Indeed, at the
time of their birth all inauspicious omens were observed
in the heavens and on earth – cows yielded blood instead
of milk, clouds rained pus, trees fell down for no
reason, braying asses ran wildly, birds flew shrieking
from their nests, she-jackals vomited fire, misty halos
appeared around the sun and the moon, and malefic
planets glowed more brightly. As the two boys entered
their youth, they began to exhibit uncommon bodily
features, developing steel-like frames that began to
grow just like two great mountains. They became so tall
that they seemed to touch outer space. When they walked,
the earth shook and, having profusely decorated
themselves with brilliantly shining gold ornaments,
their huge forms were so dazzling that they seemed to
block out the sun and all directions.

Desiring to enjoy everything in their sight, the two
brothers were keen to take over the whole universe.
Incited by his older brother, the hot-tempered
Hiranyaksha took a club on his shoulder and traveled all
over the creation in a fighting spirit. In his search to
find someone who could match him in battle, the proud
demon terrified everyone who crossed his path, including
the demigods who ran and hid in fear of him. Finally, he
was directed to fight with Lord Vishnu, the Supreme
Person, who was the only one who could satisfy him in
combat. Coming in His boar incarnation as Varaha-dev,
the Lord engaged in a long, fierce battle with the
arrogant demon, and finally finished him off by simply
slapping his ear.

When Hiranya-kashipu learned that Lord Vishnu had killed
his brother, he was greatly aggrieved. Thirsty for
revenge he vowed to cut off Vishnu’s head and offer an
oblation of His gushing blood to his brother, who had
been very fond of drinking blood. Thinking that Vishnu
lives from the offerings of the sacrificial ceremonies,
which were regularly performed by the priests to please
the Lord for the auspiciousness of society, he schemed
to destroy the Lord by stopping the sacrifices. Thus, he
sent out hordes of demons to kill the cows (who supply
ghee for the sacrifices) and the Brahmins (the priests
who officiate at the sacrifices). He also ordered them
to destroy all the trees and plants that nourish the
cows, and to set fire to all the temples and the
residences of the cows, Brahmins and followers of the
Vedas. In this way the mighty demon ravaged the earth.

Attempting to rival the Supreme Lord Vishnu, Hiranya-
kashipu was determined to become immortal and to gain
supremacy over the entire universe. With this aim in

                           3
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

mind, he performed severe austerities. For one hundred
celestial years (22,000 years by earthly calculation),
he stood on his toes, held his arms up straight and
looked upward. Fire began blazing from his head and
spread throughout the universe, causing all the planets
to become too hot for habitation. From the birds and
beasts to the demigods – all living beings were greatly
troubled. Even the mountains on all the planets trembled
and stars and planets fell. Finally, all the demigods
appealed to the creator of the material universe, Lord
Brahma, who went to speak with Hiranya-kashipu. Brahma
was amazed to find him completely covered over by an
anthill. The demon had been standing there for so long
that worms and ants had devoured his flesh; he was
remaining alive by circulating the vital air in his
bones.

Lord Brahma was so impressed with the demon’s
determination and extreme austerities that he willingly
granted him any boon that was within his power to give.
He sprinkled Hiranya-kashipu with a few drops of divine
water from his waterpot, and Hiranya-kashipu stepped out
of the anthill completely revitalized. Now his body was
fresh and powerful and it glowed like gold. He proceeded
to conquer all the planets in the three worlds – upper,
middle and lower (heaven, earth and hell). He brought
all the living entities under his control and ruled them
with a heavy hand. Living in fear, all of the demigods
and great sages were, as if by force, steadily coming to
worship and glorify him.

In his reign of terror, Hiranya-kashipu oppressed the
demigods, the followers of the Vedas, the cows, the
Brahmins and the religious, saintly persons. He
systematically overturned all the established religious
practices within this world, thus creating havoc
throughout society. He was so powerful that he even
reversed the results of people’s pious and impious
activities. He awarded suffering to the virtuous and
happiness to the miscreants. Everyone, including the
rulers of the various planets, suffered extreme distress
from Hiranya-kashipu’s severe persecution. Only one
person remained undisturbed by this terrible demon – his
small son Prahlad, who by dint of his pure devotion, was
always seeing the Lord everywhere.

The extent of Hiranya-kashipu’s power was inconceivable,
yet he remained unsatisfied and consumed with envy for
Lord Vishnu. The whole universe was under his thumb, but
he could not control his own son. Venting his anger and
frustration upon the saintly child, he brought about his
own demise. Now, please read the wonderful story of the
fearless prince, Prahlad Maharaj.



The Editor




The Fearless Prince


                           4
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017




The Lord’s Grandeur




Shri Krishna, the Supreme Lord who attracts every living
being by His inconceivable beauty and sweetness, is wor-
shiped by different kinds of high class, self-realized
devotees. They are distinguished by the degree of their
service, intimacy and awareness of Shri Krishna’s
position as the Supreme Godhead. A devotee in the first
stage of development is one whose knowledge of Krishna’s
majesty and opulences is always in the forefront. Such a
lover of God knows all transcendental truths – who
Krishna is, what the nature of the soul is, what
illusion (Maya) is, what supreme love is, what the
various levels of pure devotion to Shri Krishna are, and
what nectar exists in the loving exchanges between Shri
Krishna and His devotees.

The best example of a devotee on this level, who
worships the Supreme Lord in a mood of awe and
reverence, is Prahlad Maharaj. He is honored with the
title ‘Maharaj’, meaning ‘a king among great
personalities endowed with pure love for Shri Krishna’.
Today we will explain the bhakti (selfless devotion to
Shri Krishna) found in the heart of Prahlad Maharaj –
how he was an unparalleled devotee of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. If you want to become a devotee
of the Lord, you must follow Prahlad’s example of
humility, purity and tolerance. First of all, this will
require that you give up your desires for sense
gratification and cultivate an exclusive desire for
bhakti. Your devotion should not be covered by an over-
endeavor to acquire dry knowledge or material happiness,
or by performing austerities or other extraneous
activities, such as mystic yoga, sacrifices, mundane
piety and fulfilling vows. Rather, your devotion should
exhibit some tendency to spontaneously serve Shri
Krishna with body, mind and words. If you engage all the
senses and moods of the heart in serving the Lord in
this way, then your endeavors will be considered bhakti.




Prahlad’s Demoniac Father




Prahlad Maharaj was extraordinary – very humble and very
tolerant. His father, Hiranya-kashipu, was an erudite
scholar of the Vedic scriptures. All the Vedas were on
the tip of his tongue, and he was also well versed in
Sanskrit grammar. But his nature was demoniac because he
was opposed to Lord Krishna. Anyone in this world,
whether human or otherwise, surely has a demoniac nature
if he is inimical to God. In previous times there were

                            5
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

only two or three demons on the planet, like Ravana and
Hiranya-kashipu, but nowadays there are demons
everywhere, in every country. For no reason they want to
destroy the world. So we should be careful of them. How?
We can protect ourselves by chanting the sacred names of
God under the guidance of any pure devotee of Lord
Krishna.

Hiranya-kashipu had received a boon from Lord Brahma,
the creator of the material universe, from whom he had
cleverly requested, “Please bless me that I will not die
in the air, on this earth or on any lower or higher
planet. Bless me that I will not be killed by any
weapon, by anything living or dead, by any man or animal
created by you (Brahma), or by any bird, snake or other
such creature. You please further bless me that I will
not die during the day or night, during any month of any
year, or either outdoors or indoors.” He thus received a
boon that appeared to make him immortal.

Though Hiranya-kashipu and Prahlad were related as
father and son, they maintained substantial differences
of opinion. Hiranya-kashipu would quarrel with the
child, but the young prince always remained humble and
tolerant. Hiranya-kashipu was a demon, yet Prahlad
Maharaj was a pure hearted devotee and was like a
demigod. It is quite unusual for the son of a demon to
be a high-class devotee, a godly personality. Of
Hiranya-kashipu’s four sons, Prahlad was the youngest.
His father favored him because he was very intelligent.
He therefore sent him to the school of Sukracharya, the
materialistic guru of the demons.




Teach My Boy to Be Just like Me




At that time Sukracharya was absent, having gone away on
a long mission, so his sons Sanda and Amarka were
teaching the young prince. Sanda means ‘bull’. A bull is
very lusty and dangerous, and sometimes it goes mad.
Arka means ‘light’, so Amarka means ‘where there is no
light’. These two brothers were not in the light,
meaning they had no realization of the self. Persons who
act like bulls and who are always in darkness, ignorant
of the fundamental transcendental truths about the
Supreme Godhead, are like Sanda and Amarka. Hiranya-
kashipu ordered them, “Teach my boy Prahlad about
mundane religious duties, economic development, sense
gratification and liberation. Especially focus on
politics – how to defeat enemies, how to acquire
kingdoms, and how to hide the truth by diplomacy.”

After four or five months in the school Prahlad returned
home. His mother Kayadu decorated him and brought him to
his father. When Hiranya-kashipu saw his beautiful and
humble son, he kissed him and happily took him on his
lap. “My dear son,” he said, “you are so intelligent,
and I am so pleased with you. What have you been

                           6
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                           5/5/2017

studying? Tell me the best thing you have learned in
school.”

Prahlad’s Devotion Shines Forth



Prahlad Maharaj replied:



sravanam kirtanam vishnoh smaranam pada-sevanam

archanam vandanam dasyam sakhyam atma-nivedanam

“Nine processes are accepted as pure devotional service:
hearing and chanting about the transcendental holy name,
form, qualities, paraphernalia and pastimes of Lord
Krishna (Vishnu), remembering Him, serving His lotus
feet, offering Him respectful worship with many nice
items, offering Him prayers, becoming His servant,
considering Him one’s best friend, and surrendering
everything unto Him (in other words, serving Him with
body, mind and words). One who has dedicated his life to
the service of Shri Krishna through these nine methods
should be understood to be the most learned person, as
he has acquired complete knowledge.”




Hiranya-kashipu’s Fury




Hearing his son’s expression of devotion to the Supreme
Lord, Hiranya-kashipu became red hot with anger. Then,
laughing at the irony of the situation he shouted,
“Prahlad, I brought you into this world. I am the person
who maintains you and takes care of you. Everything you
have comes from me. How can you be so ungrateful as to
not respect me as your father, and instead take the side
of our enemy Vishnu?! Prahlad, who has taught you about
Vishnu? Your gurus, Sanda and Amarka?” Turning to the
boy’s teachers, he sharply denounced them, “Is this what
you have taught my son? I instructed you to teach him
practical matters for his material success. Why have you
taught him about spirituality and devotion to Vishnu?
For this I will punish you! I will cut off your heads!”

Sanda and Amarka began to tremble. “O sir,” they
replied, “we have not trained him in devotion to Vishnu.
We do not know where he has picked up this foolishness.
He just speaks these things instinctively. Ask him where
he learned this. Ask him if we taught it to him or if he
heard this from someone else.”

Hiranya-kashipu angrily questioned his boy, “Where did
you learn this? If these two gurus, Sanda and Amarka,
have not taught you this, then where did you learn all
this nonsense that you are speaking so boldly? Who
visited the school? Narada or any other devotee? Speak

                           7
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

the truth; otherwise I will kill you. Do you think I am
foolish? Or your gurus, Sanda, Amarka and Sukracharya –
do you think they are foolish? Do you think that they
don’t know anything? Is this what you are implying?” He
then ordered the two teachers, “Take Prahlad and again
teach him politics and diplomacy – how to control
subjects, how to conquer others, and how to be powerful
like me. Furthermore, a guard should be kept to ensure
that no devotee of that Krishna, Vishnu, enters that
part of the school.”

Thereupon, Sanda and Amarka took the boy back to school.
Some months later Prahlad again returned home. Mother
Kayadu decorated her son, and brought him to the lap of
his father. Hiranya-kashipu, very happy to see his son,
asked the same question as before, “What have you
learned in school from your guru?”




Fixed in Higher Consciousness




Prahlad answered, “O my dear father, those persons whose
consciousness is not fixed on Shri Krishna but rather on
enjoying material life, cannot actually understand the
goal of life and their real self-interest. This human
form of life is meant for worshiping the Supreme Lord
Krishna, but materialistic persons can never understand
this because their senses are uncontrolled. Totally
dedicated to satisfying their senses, they are pulled
away from pursuing the real goal of life and repeatedly
engage in chewing the chewed. The materialistic way of
life is like chewing over and over again that which has
already been chewed, looking for happiness where there
is none to be found. Although there is no profit in such
a life, people with uncontrolled senses are enamored by
it. Thus, they enter into the darkest regions of
ignorance and progress towards a hellish situation
filled with untold sufferings.

“Persons who are striving to enjoy material life or who
are totally immersed in family affairs, remain unaware
that the ultimate goal of our existence is to worship
the lotus feet of Lord Vishnu and go back home, back to
Godhead. Instead, they focus all their aspirations on
the false hope of trying to enjoy their body, wife,
children, home, relatives, job and society, convinced
that these things will make them happy. But the truth of
the matter is that family and material success actually
have nothing to do with their real self-interest.
Completely blind to the actual purpose of human life,
such persons accept as their guru another blind man who
is also attached to materialistic life. Thus, the blind
lead the blind. Inevitably all of them stray from the
path and fall into a ditch. If the guru does not know
the purpose of life, then he is destined for hell, along
with his disciples.”

Hiranya-kashipu became furious. “Are you insinuating

                           8
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                          5/5/2017

that I am blind and foolish?” he screamed, “and that my
guru, Sukracharya, and his sons Sanda and Amarka are
bogus persons? Are you saying that they have no
intelligence and that you know more than them? Don’t you
know how great my guru is? He is so learned and powerful
that just by sprinkling a few drops of water on a dead
body he can bring that person back to life. Do you think
that my guru and I are so misdirected that you should
teach us about spiritual life? I worshiped Lord Brahma
for over 20,000 years. Do you think I have simply wasted
my time? For disrespecting my guru and my beliefs,
prepare to meet your death, for I shall put an end to
you and your foolish talk of God!”

Prahlad Maharaj remained totally fearless. He boldly
declared, “Yes, both of you are blind – your guru and
you. Both of you are demons, and therefore blind to the
truth. If you do not humbly approach high class,
qualified devotees, whose hearts are immersed in their
loving service to the Supreme Lord and who kindly
instruct others on devotional service, then you have no
intelligence. You must bathe and purify your mind in the
dust of the lotus feet of such saintly personalities,
meaning that you must hear and follow their
instructions. If you accept their guidance, your
intelligence will become fixed on Shri Krishna, and all
the impure desires in your heart will be removed. Dear
father, give up your egotistical ways and take shelter
of such a bona fide guru, whose only wealth in life is
the Supreme wealth – devoted service to Shri Krishna.
Only then can you be freed from your contaminated
material consciousness.”




Futile Attempts to Kill Prahlad




Again his wicked father, Hiranya-kashipu, raged in
anger, “Oh! I will punish you!” That demon took up his
sword and club, intending to kill Prahlad, but
mysteriously he found he was powerless to do so. Then he
ordered his generals, “This boy should be put to death
at once.” The whole army was deputed to kill the young
prince, but they also were rendered impotent in front of
the child. Hiranya-kashipu repeatedly tried to kill
Prahlad Maharaj, giving his soldiers one command after
another:

“Bring mad elephants and let them attack him.”

“Throw him into a pit of venomous snakes that will bite
him to death.”

“Force him to drink strong, vile poison.”

“Put him in a cage with dangerous lions and let them
devour him.”

“Bind him to a rock and hurl him from the peak of a

                           9
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

mountain into the ocean to drown.”

“Crush him with an onslaught of massive boulders.”

But each and every scheme was foiled by the Lord saving
Prahlad. The soldiers’ swords could not cut him. The
mere touch of Prahlad’s body electrified the elephants
and as they ran off in fear they crushed so many
soldiers and demons. The lions befriended the boy and
began to lick him. And as Prahlad was falling into the
ocean, Lord Vishnu Himself came and caught him and
gently placed him on the shore.

Hiranya-kashipu tried one more time. He had a very
beautiful and powerful sister named Holika. She was so
accomplished in mystic yoga that she could enter blazing
fire without getting burnt. Summoning her at once, the
great emperor petitioned her, “My dear sister, my
darling sister, I am requesting your help. I have tried
so hard to kill Prahlad, but it seems impossible. Now I
am relying on you to accomplish this task. I know that
this will be a simple matter for you. Take him in your
arms and enter a big fire. Surely the boy will be
destroyed and you will come out untouched. I will reward
you very handsomely with so much wealth.” Prahlad’s dear
auntie was most happy to comply, being hungry for riches
and having no real affection for her nephew.

A huge fire was ignited, its towering flames appearing
like giant tongues touching the sky. Holika decorated
herself nicely and, happily taking Prahlad Maharaj in
her arms, she entered the fire. But something very
mystical happened. The fire could not touch Prahlad
Maharaj and Holika was at once burnt to ashes. To
Prahlad the flames felt like cool snow and he emerged
from the fire blissfully chanting “Hare Krishna, Hare
Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.”

Hiranya-kashipu and his whole entourage could do nothing
to harm Prahlad, because Shri Krishna never failed to
protect the boy. Krishna has promised, “I will always
protect those who take shelter of Me. If I want to save
My surrendered devotees, no one can hurt them, even if
the whole world is bent on doing so.” If one takes
shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Shri
Krishna, or any bona fide guru like Narada, Vyas,
Sukadev Goswami, Rupa Goswami and Sanatan Goswami, no
one can harm him, even if the whole world is against
him. Krishna is bound to save him. Therefore, even
though Hiranya-kashipu was inconceivably powerful and
desperate to kill his son, his every attempt proved
futile.

The Great Emperor Begins to Worry



Hiranya-kashipu became filled with anxiety. He worried,
“I did everything I could to destroy Prahlad, but all my
efforts failed. Perhaps this boy has some mystic powers
and will end up killing me instead.” Previously,
Hiranya-kashipu thought that the boon he had received
from Lord Brahma made him immortal, but now he became

                           10
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

afraid. He who had amassed huge power and taken control
of the whole universe now felt puzzled and totally
helpless.

Sanda and Amarka reassured him, “Oh, there is nothing to
worry about. You are the emperor of the whole universe.
Prahlad is just a small child. Why are you so troubled?
He is like a mosquito. You can easily squash him with
your fingers and kill him.

“Our father Sukracharya is the master of all knowledge.
Let us wait until he returns, and he will resolve this
problem. Until then, we will continue teaching your son.
Our father’s power is such that he can revive a dead
body just with his glance. And if ever he becomes so
angry that his eyes turn red, the mere raising of his
eyebrows can burn someone to ashes. By his persuasive
logic he will bring Prahlad to his senses, and then the
boy will do whatever you tell him. In the meantime let
him come with us.”




Back to School




Thus Prahlad Maharaj was forced to return to the school
with his gurus. They continued their attempts to divert
his propensity for spiritual life and tried to instill
in him his father’s voracious lust for dominion over
material affairs, teaching him how to cheat others, how
to become vastly wealthy, how to make merry and how to
be expert in gratifying his senses. But Prahlad was
boldly fixed in his faith and was never affected by
them. Instead, he was silent and within his mind he
remained absorbed in chanting Shri Krishna’s names and
remembering His pastimes and qualities.

One day the teachers had to go out for some other
business. They appointed Prahlad Maharaj as class
monitor. “We will return very soon,” they said. “Look
after the other children. Make sure that they do not
quarrel and that they do not spend all their time
playing. They should be calm and quiet under your
supervision. We will return shortly.”

As soon as their gurus left, the children, who were also
the sons of demons, started to play. Prahlad Maharaj
humbly requested them, “O my friends, O sons of demons,
listen to me. I want to tell you something that will
make you happy for your whole life. After that you can
go and play.” Because they had great honor for Prahlad,
they assembled before him, even though he was only five
years old. He then began to instruct his classmates.




Prahlad’s Instruction — Start Right Now!

                           11
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017




“O my brothers, listen! From this early age we should
meditate on the Supreme Lord. Nothing in this world
exists on its own. Some say that everything has come
from nature, but what does ‘nature’ mean? Whose nature
is it? Nature is the power, the energy, of Shri Krishna.
He can create and control millions of universes and in a
moment He can destroy them. And then, in the next moment
He can create them again. He is supremely powerful.
Furthermore, He knows each and every one of you, but you
do not know Him. Through my constant chanting and
remembering the Lord, I have been able to learn a little
about Him.

“We should begin spiritual life from a young age – from
this very moment, right now! Don’t say, ‘I will begin
tomorrow.’ It may well be that tomorrow will never come
for you. Don’t waste your time in uselessly trying to
enjoy temporary material life. Start from today. What
you intend to do tomorrow you should begin today, and
what you are going to do today, you should begin right
now. Chant ‘Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna,
Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.’
Old age and disease are bound to come. And whatever you
collect in this life – be it wealth, reputation or
position – you will have to leave behind. You cannot
take even one penny with you from this world. Do you
agree?”

“Yes, we agree completely,” the boys replied. “You are
certainly speaking the truth.”

“My dear friends, O sons of demons, the human form of
life is temporary, whereas the soul within is eternal.
This human life is meant for discovering one’s real
identity – the soul – and for returning home, back to
Godhead. Therefore every living entity, especially in
the human form of life, should engage in devotional
service to the Supreme Lord Krishna. This devotional
service is natural, because Lord Krishna is the creator
and master of the soul. He is the well-wisher of all
living entities and the soul’s most beloved. The duty of
everyone is to take shelter of the Supreme Lord and
whole-heartedly engage in His service. By this the
living being becomes free from all material desires and
starts to taste the transcendental bliss that comes from
serving the Lord with love. Thus, when one is completely
liberated from material existence, one experiences real
happiness in life.

“Therefore, my brothers, immediately begin meditating
upon and worshiping Lord Krishna, who is supremely
attractive. From this very moment begin chanting ‘Hare
Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare/Hare
Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.’ We will all grow
old and have to die. Start from the beginning of your
life. Don’t waste your time in politics, duplicity,
hypocrisy and so on. Remember that Shri Krishna is the
Supreme Lord. He is all-powerful and He is so merciful,
causelessly merciful. He has invested all His power, all
His beauty, all His sweetness and all His causeless

                           12
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

mercy in His names. So if you chant and remember these
names, you will get so much benefit.”

The leader of the boys, however, challenged, “Why should
we chant and meditate on the name of Krishna? We are
young; why should we not play? And later we can become
expert in making money and in arranging for our material
comforts. This will make us happy.”




Material Life Is Temporary




Prahlad Maharaj retorted, “These activities will not
bring you happiness. Who knows if you will even reach
old age. And if you do, then disease will come and
finally you will die – tomorrow or the day after
tomorrow, or even just now. Any minute you could be
struck by a thunderbolt and die on the spot.”

If you are going somewhere by airplane, the machine can
suddenly fail and all four hundred persons aboard can
die. And where your body and bones end up, no one will
know.

Prahlad continued, “Even if you do not meet an untimely
death and you reach old age, then after eighty you will
not even be able to sit straight to meditate and chant.
So many diseases will come. Your daughter-in-law will
create so many problems – she will beat your back with a
broom – oh, she will make you very clean! You will be
beset by so many difficulties that you will not be able
to chant and remember. It may be that your throat will
choke up and you will be unable to speak. You may become
mad or senile. So many problems can come and distract
you from remembering the Lord.

“Understand that this life is meant only to revive your
lost relationship with the Supreme Lord Krishna. You now
have the chance to come out of the endless chain of
birth and death and to reinstate yourself in the
blissful service of the Lord for your eternal, perfect
existence. Real happiness lies in spiritual life.
Material attachments, especially the illusory happiness
of family life, hold one back from taking up devotional
practices. If you marry in your old age, then how will
you be able to renounce your newly wedded wife and
small, weeping children? If your father is too old, how
will you give him up? Your children, very small and very
sweetly calling out, ‘Papa, Mama’ – how can you give
them up? Your beautiful gardens, beautiful dogs – how
can you give them up?

“Once a person’s consciousness is awakened to the
knowledge that he is an eternal living being who finds
his true happiness only in serving the Supreme Lord,
these other relationships become insignificant. Better
to give up your plans for material enjoyment at this
young age and chant and remember Shri Krishna. This

                             13
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

human life is rarely achieved, and although temporary,
it affords the opportunity to perform devotional
service. Even a slight amount of sincere devotional
activity can bring complete perfection. If you want to
be happy, what should you do? Practice bhakti yoga.
Begin to serve Lord Shri Krishna.”




Devotion to Krishna Brings Real Happiness




From boyhood, from the beginning of your life, devote
yourselves to Shri Krishna. At whatever point in your
life you hear this message, even if you are fifty years
old, no harm – you can still start to practice. You are
able to hear this message due to previous good
association. This means that as a result of spiritual
merits accrued in a previous life, you had the good
fortune to meet a saint at that time, and as a result
you now are receiving this knowledge.

We should not waste our time in sense gratification and
other useless activities. Why? In whatever species you
take birth, sense gratification is available. In animal
life – if you are in the body of a dog or pig, you can
collect unlimited wives. You do not have to spend any
money on them and there is no bother about divorce. Oh,
freely you can enjoy so many new, new wives. You will
not have to worry about being taken to court – nothing
is required for the maintenance of your children. In the
human form you can have only one son or daughter a year
– not more than that. Occasionally someone will have
twins, but that is rare. But hogs, pigs and dogs can
have eight, ten, twelve, even sixteen babies at a time.
So in this respect they are superior to us. At any time,
in any species of life you can have all the sense
gratification that the animals enjoy. They are more
expert in enjoying their senses than you, so do not let
yourself become absorbed simply in satisfying your
senses. From the beginning of your life chant Shri
Krishna’s names, remember Him and meditate on Him.

Furthermore, as everyone knows, suffering comes without
invitation. All kinds of problems – death, old age,
disease, quarreling with neighbors and so many other
difficulties come, and the government also creates so
many problems. Hardships come without invitation and
without warning. This holds true also for our happiness.
By our previous pious activities we are entitled to a
certain amount of happiness. It will come automatically.
There is no need to work for it.

If we believe in God, automatically all kinds of
happiness will come without invitation. Why should we be
so anxious for our enjoyment? In this life we need not
endeavor for any material happiness, and we need not
worry about removing our difficulties. To do so is not
the aim and object of our life. Difficulties will come
regardless, whether we like it or not. They will force

                           14
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

themselves upon us and we will have to taste them. We
are bound to taste the reactions from all our past
activities, so why are we wasting our time, worrying
over our happiness and distress? Instead, we should
chant the holy name of Krishna – it is very powerful.
Krishna has made His name more merciful and more
beautiful than He Himself! All of His sweet pastimes are
in His name. We should not think that His name is merely
a mundane sound vibration. It is extremely powerful, so
from the beginning of our lives we should chant His holy
name.

Human Life Is Precious



Suppose in Kali Yuga (the present age of hypocrisy and
quarrel) one lives for 100 years. In previous ages,
millions of years ago, people lived inconceivably long
lives. In Satya Yuga (the age when truth and goodness
prevailed everywhere) people lived to be more than
100,000 years old. Some were practically immortal. In
Treta Yuga, people lived about 10,000 years, and in
Dvarapa Yuga they lived nearly 1,000 years. Now in Kali
Yuga people do not control their senses – taking
whiskey, cigarettes, eggs, meat and wine. These things
shorten one’s life span. People suffer from
tuberculosis, cancer and so many kinds of new diseases
that cannot be cured in hospitals or controlled by the
scientists or anyone else. New, new diseases arise, like
AIDS. We do not know where all the diseases are coming
from, but there is no doubt that they are the result of
excessive indulgence.

Prahlad continued speaking to his schoolmates: “If you
live one hundred years, half of your time is lost in
sleep. Thus fifty years remain. And if you are not
disciplined and regulated in your habits, then your life
will be even shorter. Childhood, up to age twenty, goes
in vain, playing, studying and then becoming expert in a
skill so that you can maintain yourself. And for most
people the years from 80-100 are useless – you cannot
sit, you cannot meditate or do practically anything.
Whatever time is left is spent in marriage.”

These days people get married not just once – so many
people get divorced and again marry how many times!
There is no gain in this. And marriage brings children,
who need to be provided an education and other
necessities. And to keep up with the rest of society, a
car is essential, as are all the furnishings for the
house – television and so many newer and newer gadgets –
especially computers. So when will there be time to
remember Shri Krishna and worship Him? There will be no
time at all.

Hearing Prahlad’s message, the other boys asked him,
“What should we do?”

“Do not worry about making money or anything else,”
Prahlad replied. “Achieving material happiness and
avoiding suffering is not our business in life. Whatever
happiness or distress will come to us is already written
in our fate. We have our destinies mapped out from our

                           15
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

previous lives. We do not want suffering, but it comes.
We do not want old age, but it will come. We do not want
to die, but death will come. We do not want our husbands
or wives to divorce us, but it happens anyway. We want
to be happy, but automatically suffering comes of its
own accord. No one can avoid it. Similarly, the
happiness in our lives will come without any effort on
our part, so we should not be so concerned about it. We
should put our energy into chanting and remembering
Krishna, and by doing so we will be happy forever.
Chanting Hare Krishna is the panacea for all miseries.
It is so powerful that even our endless cycle of birth
and death will be broken. This is the way.”

His schoolmates said to him, “What you have said is very
good. Please tell us how we can serve the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. What is the process?”

Prahlad answered, “You must take shelter of a bona fide
guru and serve him like your dear-most friend. See him
as your very close family member – more dear to you than
your father, your mother or your best friend. And to
receive knowledge from the guru you must serve him. This
will give you the intelligence and capacity to
understand how to serve Krishna.”

The young prince asked his schoolmates, “Are you
convinced?” After hearing Prahlad Maharaj’s
instructions, the boys were astonished. “Oh yes, we are
convinced. But where did you learn all these things?”

He explained that when his father had gone away to
perform austerities to attain his power, his mother,
Kayadhu, was pregnant with him. At that time she was
staying in the hermitage of the exalted saint Narada
Muni, who instructed her in the eternal process of
serving the lotus feet of Shri Krishna. While in the
womb, Prahlad Maharaj heard all the teachings of the
Vedas, Puranas, Upanishads and Shrimad-Bhagavatam. Thus,
when he took birth he was already a realized soul due to
his association with the great saint Narada.




Prahlad Convinces the Sons of the Demons




Prahlad Maharaj told his friends, “So, if you are
convinced, come with me and together we will loudly and
joyfully sing out the names of God.” Thus, all the
students began the congregational chanting of the Maha-
mantra:



Hare Krishna Hare Krishna Krishna Krishna Hare Hare

Hare Rama Hare Rama Rama Rama Hare Hare

Somehow from the distance Hiranya-kashipu heard the

                           16
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                           5/5/2017

school children singing. With great displeasure he
thought, “My son has deliberately defied me, and he has
made all the other boys rebellious like him. Now all of
them have become wicked and dangerous.” He summoned
Prahlad and his schoolmates to his court. “Prahlad, why
are you doing this?” Seeing that all the boys were
joyfully smiling, He angrily chastized them. “Don’t
laugh, all you children. Why are you so happy? Are you
now following Lord Krishna’s devotees? Don’t you know
who I am? I am Hiranya-kashipu – the controller of the
whole universe. Have you no fear?”

Then what happened? Hiranya-kashipu at once took his
sword and club in hand, and threatening Prahlad he said,
“Are you not afraid of death? Why not? Where does your
strength come from? Who keeps saving you?”

Very politely Prahlad answered, “O my dear father, that
person who saves me is the same person who saves you and
everyone else. He is everywhere, and everything is in
Him. Shri Krishna is your strength, my strength and the
strength of all living beings.”

“Where is your Krishna? Where is your Vishnu?”

“My Vishnu is everywhere.”

“Is He in this pillar?”

“Oh, yes! There is no place He is not. He is in every
atom, in the heart of all living beings, in that pillar,
here, there and everywhere.”

“I do not see Him.”

“But I do see Him – my Vishnu is there.”

“I will test whether your Vishnu is in this pillar or
not. I am going to kill you, and we will see if He comes
to save you. If He does, then I will see who He is.”




The Startling Appearance of Lord Narasingha-dev




Hiranya-kashipu picked up his sword in a challenging
spirit, and with great anger struck the pillar with his
bare fist. At once a tumultuous roaring sound was heard.
He looked around to see from where the sound was coming.
Then, from the pillar burst forth the most amazing and
wonderful creature. The Supreme Lord appeared there as
Lord Narasingha-dev. He was neither man nor lion;
rather, He was a mixture of the two. He had the head of
a lion – huge, ferocious and dangerous; and the body of
a man – very beautiful and strong.

Lord Narasingha-dev became extremely furious and
menacing. Flames were coming out of His mane, which was
flying in the air and touching the sky. It seemed as if

                             17
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

the whole world was on fire. Hiranya-kashipu wondered,
“Is this a man or a lion?” And then he attacked that
extraordinary creature, beating Him with his club. They
fought like two giant wrestlers, locking arms in combat
and rolling from corner to corner. Narasingha-dev
tightly grabbed hold of Hiranya-kashipu. As he was
struggling to get free, the Lord loosened His grip and
let that demon slip out of His clutches. Watching the
fierce combat and seeing how Hiranya-kashipu escaped
from Narasingha-dev’s hands, all the demigods became
nervous. They feared that if Hiranya-kashipu would not
be killed, he would continue to harass them, as well as
all the other living entities in the universe. In great
anxiety they cried out, “Alas, alas, now Hiranya-kashipu
will kill the Lord, and then he will kill all of us!”

But there was no need to worry. Narasingha-dev was
playing with Hiranya-kashipu just as the eagle Garuda
plays with snakes. After resting briefly, Hiranya-
kashipu took his sword and shield, and with great force
attacked the Lord again. Lord Narasingha-dev easily
captured Hiranya-kashipu and took him on His lap. More
ferocious than a lion, Narasingha-dev roared loudly as
He ripped open Hiranya-kashipu’s stomach with His large
nails. He pulled out all of the demon’s intestines and
draped them around His neck like a garland while blood
spattered here and there. That demon was killed in a
moment. The Lord continued roaring in anger and everyone
was scared.

To respect the words of the creator Brahma, the Lord
came in this form. Brahma had given Hiranya-kashipu the
benediction that he would not be killed by any man or
any animal. He would not be killed in the daytime or the
nighttime, nor in any of the twelve months of the year.
He would not be killed outside or inside, not on the
earth and not in the sky, not by an arrow, club, sword
or any other weapon, and not by anything living or dead.
Thus, Lord Narasingha-dev – who was half-man, half-lion
– killed the demon in the evening as the sun was setting
– it was neither daytime nor nighttime; during a leap
year – it was not a regular year; in the doorway – not
inside or outside; on His lap – not on the earth or in
the sky; and using only His very, very huge and
beautiful nails – not any weapon nor anything living or
dead.




The Lord’s Love for Prahlad




Narasingha-dev was so angry at that time that no one
could go near Him. Many, many demigods, including Lord
Shiva and Lord Brahma, were there, standing in front of
the Lord but at a distance. Laksmi, the Goddess of
Fortune, had come and wanted to pacify Narasingha-dev
with Brahma and Shiva, but none of them dared to come
close. They turned to Prahlad Maharaj, saying, “Dear
boy, you should go and pacify Narasingha-dev.” Smiling,

                              18
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017

Prahlad Maharaj gladly ran to Lord Narasingha-dev and
jumped on His lap. The Lord’s anger vanished at once and
He became calm and quiet. With melted heart Narasingha-
dev caressed Prahlad Maharaj, and with tears in His
eyes, He said, “O Prahlad, My dear boy! Excuse Me for
taking so long to come. I wanted to come sooner, but I
could not come until now. Lord Brahma promised your
father that he would not be killed in any regular year
or any month, so I had to wait for the proper moment.
And I wanted the world to bear witness to the exalted
nature and power of your devotion. Your father was
giving you so many difficulties and problems. Because
you had to tolerate so much, I want to reward you with a
benediction.”

To test Prahlad, the Lord offered to award him the
liberation that was given to the demon Shishupal –
merging into the Lord’s transcendental body. So many
impersonalist sages in the line of Shankaracarya strived
for this type of salvation but could not achieve it even
after thousands and thousands of births. Narasingha-dev
was ready to give this easily to Prahlad, but he
rejected it. The Lord requested him again and again,
“You should take a boon from Me.” But Prahlad refused.

The boy smiled and replied, “What to speak of this
impersonal liberation, I don’t even want to be in
Vaikuntha, Your eternal abode in the Spiritual Sky. I
will not ask You for anything. I am not a business man
who takes something in exchange for Your service. I have
not served You in order to get a benediction from You. I
am not that type of person. I have served You only to
satisfy You. I only ask that You be pleased with me.”

“Prahlad, you must take a boon so that My appearance
here does not go in vain. Only to please Me, you must
ask for something; otherwise I will not be happy. Ask
for any boon.”

“If You want to give me a boon, I request You to remove
any worldly desires that I may have.”

Narasingha-dev answered, “You have no worldly desires,
none. Ask for something else.”

“If you want to give something, then there is one thing
I would like. My father has performed so many heinous
atrocities and committed untold offenses to saintly
persons. Nonetheless, I request that he be liberated.”

The Lord said, “He has already been liberated. For a
high level, pure devotee who is serving Krishna,
chanting His names and remembering Him, twenty-one
previous generations in his dynasty are automatically
liberated. For a second-class devotee, fourteen
generations are easily liberated. And for the neophyte
devotee who takes shelter of the lotus feet of a pure
hearted guru and who is chanting God’s names and
remembering His activities, seven generations are freed.
So, surely your father has been given salvation. Ask for
something else.”




                           19
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                         5/5/2017



Prahlad’s Humble Prayer — Please Liberate All




Prahlad replied, “I know that I am very near and very
dear to You. If You are pleased with the way I have
served You, then in exchange I request You to liberate
everyone in the material universe. You are so
affectionate to Your devotees. All living beings are
Your parts and parcels and, therefore, Your eternal
servants. Everyone in this world is suffering. I will
take all their sins and reactions – everything. I want
to suffer for them. I will stay here for as many births
as necessary and I am even willing to go to hell forever
for them. Please be merciful and grant me this boon for
the benefit of all.

“O my Lord, O infallible one. I am prepared to take
thousands and thousands of births. I only request that
wherever You place me, I receive the association of
great saints and always worship You.”

Narasingha-dev answered, “O Prahlad, you have indeed
purchased Me. Now I am yours. I cannot cheat you with
material benedictions and I cannot possibly allow you to
suffer. But I will agree to this – those who hear or
tell others this pastime will be easily liberated. Not
only will they be liberated, but they will receive pure
devotion for Me. How will this happen? They must first
take shelter of a bona fide guru – this means accepting
initiation and agreeing to live under his guidance
according to his instructions. In this way living
entities will be gradually liberated.”

Thus, Prahlad Maharaj received a wonderful benediction
to help all the living beings suffering in the material
world. Steeped in pure devotion for the Supreme Lord, he
had no care for his own welfare, because he knew that
the Lord was always looking after him. He was free from
worldly desires, and he never accepted salvation, that
is, merging into the form of the Lord. He knew that the
Supreme Lord is everywhere and is all-powerful. As the
possessor of all energies the Lord can create whole
universes in a second and just as easily destroy them.
And again He can recreate them. He is supremely
powerful, supremely charming, supremely sweet, supremely
handsome and supremely wonderful. And He is also very
humble and always satisfied. When in danger, Prahlad
never worried because he had firm faith. He knew, “My
Lord is supporting and maintaining me, and He will
always protect me. He has the power to do this.” Why did
he have that faith? Because Narasingha-dev manifests
great opulences and His devotees worship Him with
knowledge of His unlimited powers.




Unwavering Faith — The Source of Prahlad's Strength

                           20
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                        5/5/2017




So many difficulties came in Prahlad’s life, but he
tolerated all of them and never protested. He never even
thought to curse his father, and he never replied to him
in harsh words. Rather, he was always polite and
respectful. Like Prahlad Maharaj, we should try to
practice bhakti yoga, the science of pure devotional
service to the Supreme Lord. Prahlad was always praying
to the Lord and meditating on Him, because he understood
that Krishna is the Supreme Transcendental Being.
Narasingha-dev, one of Krishna’s manifestations, is also
supremely transcendental, and that is why He is so
powerful. Hiranya-kashipu tried to kill Him, but no one
can kill the Supreme Lord.

In this way Prahlad Maharaj was always thinking about
the opulence and majesty of the Supreme Lord Shri
Vishnu. He knew that his Lord is all-pervading. He is
everywhere, He can appear anywhere at any moment, and He
is all-powerful. Because Prahlad had perfect realization
of Shri Krishna’s powers, he knew that He would protect
him. He was never worried in the slightest. He could see
his Lord everywhere – in every atom and in everyone’s
heart. Even when in danger, he felt happily situated. He
simply prayed to Krishna and had no fear whatsoever. He
always saw that his Lord was with him and that He was
coming and saving him. Because Prahlad’s faith was so
strong, Krishna constantly protected him against any
kind of threat. Death could not approach him at all.

If it is your time to die, death will surely come, and
if you are not meant to die, then no one and nothing can
kill you. Prahlad’s faith made him very bold. You should
also be very bold like him. I am telling this story for
everyone’s benefit. If death is approaching and so many
problems are coming, try to rise above all your
troubles. Do not become disturbed, but rather try to be
fixed in your chanting the names of God and remembering
Him regardless of any obstacles. Do not hesitate in
continuing your worship of Shri Krishna. These are the
teachings of Prahlad Maharaj.

If you are aware of Krishna’s opulences, that He is the
supreme power and that He creates the whole material
manifestation, then you will be peaceful. You will
understand that Krishna is the original cause of all
causes. He has a transcendental form and endless
transcendental qualities. Krishna is like the
transcendental sun, and the individual living beings,
who are all His eternal servants, are like the particles
in the sun rays. All souls are specks of Krishna’s
energies, minute atoms of His power. This means that we
are made of the same divine essence that God is made of
– eternity, bliss and knowledge. And the purpose of our
existence is to share loving exchanges with the Supreme
Person, who, whether we realize it or not, is always
showering us with His love and mercy. Because Prahlad
Maharaj had this vision of the Lord, his life and
teachings are very helpful for all who want to develop
their spiritual lives.


                           21
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                         5/5/2017

After Hiranya-kashipu’s demise Prahlad Maharaj became
the king, and he preached bhakti everywhere in his
kingdom. He encouraged everyone to chant Krishna’s
names, to remember the Lord, to engage in the
congregational singing of God’s holy names, and to hear
discourses on the Supreme Lord. Thus his kingdom became
like the spiritual world, the realm of perfection beyond
all anxiety.

tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-shringam

dalita-hiranya-kashipu-tanu-bhringam

keshava! dhrita-narahari-rupa! jaya jagadisha! hare

(from Gita Govinda, by Shri Jayadeva Goswami)



O Keshava! O You who assume the form of a half-man,
half-lion! O Jagadish! O controller of the universe! O
You who remove Your devotees’ suffering! All glories to
You, because with one of the wonderful, petal-like nails
of Your beautiful lotus hands You rip asunder the
bumblebee-like body of Hiranya-kashipu. The astonishing
thing about this is that ordinarily it is the bumblebee
which rips the petals of the lotus, but here the petal
rips apart the bumblebee.



Hare Krishna Hare Krishna

Krishna Krishna Hare Hare

Hare Rama Hare Rama

Rama Rama Hare Hare



Table of Contents

Foreword

The Lord’s Grandeur

Prahlad’s Demoniac Father

Teach My Boy to Be Just like Me

Hiranya-kashipu’s Fury

Fixed in Higher Consciousness

Futile Attempts to Kill Prahlad

Back to School

Prahlad’s Instruction — Start Right Now!

Material Life Is Temporary

Devotion to Krishna Brings Real Happiness

                             22
Fearless_Prince_The.txt                           5/5/2017


Prahlad Convinces the Sons of the Demons

The Startling Appearance of Lord Narasingha-dev

The Lord’s Love for Prahlad

Prahlad’s Humble Prayer — Please Liberate All

Unwavering Faith — The Source of Prahlad's Strength




                              23
