Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt             5/5/2017

Śrī Gauḍīya Gīti-Guccha



Gauḍīya Ācāryās

(2011)



Rating:   ★★★★★




* * *




* * *




Śrī Gauḍīya Gīti-Guccha



Maṅgalācaraṇa

Śrī Gurvāṣṭakam (Sanskrit)

Śrī Gurvāṣṭakam (Bengali version)

Śrī Guru-Paramparā

Jaya-dhvani



Ārati Kīrtanas

Bhoga-Ārati

Maṅgala Ārati

Śrī Gaura-Ārati

Śrī Gurudeva Ārati

Śrī Tulasī Parikramā and Ārati

Śrī Tulasī-Kīrtana

Śrī Yugala-Ārati

Śrīla Prabhupāda Ārati



Bengali Songs


                             1
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                     5/5/2017

‘Āmāra’ Bolite Prabhu!

(Yadi) Gaurāṅga Nahito

Akrodha Paramānanda

Āmāra Jīvana

Āmāra Samāna Hīna

Āmi to’ Durjana

Ānanda Kanda Nitāi-Canda

Ār Keno Māyā-Jāle

āśraya koriya vando (Śrī Guru Mahimā)

Ātma-Nivedana

Avatāra-Sāra

Bandhu-Saṅge

Bhaja Re Āmāra Mana

Bhajahó Re Mana

Bhajo Bhajo Hari!

Bhajo Gaurāṅga

Bhavārṇave Po’ḍe Mora

Bhuliyā Tomāre

Boḍo Sukher Khabor Gāi

Bol Hari Bol

Brajendra-Nandana, Bhaje Jei Jana

Cintāmaṇi-Moy

Dekhite Dekhite

Devādi deva Gauracandra Gaurīdāsa-Mandire

Dhana Mora Nityānanda

Doyāla Nitāi Caitanya Bole

Duṣṭa Mana! Tumi Kisera Vaiṣṇava?

Ei Ghora Saṁsāre

Ei-Bāro Koruṇā Koro

Elo Gaura-Rasa-Nadī

Emona Durmati

Emona Gaurāṅga Vinā Nāhi Āra


                             2
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Emona Śacīra Nandana Bine

gaura pahu nā bhajiyā mainu (Ākṣepa)

Gaurāṅga Bolite Habe

Gaurāṅga Tumi More Doyā Nā Chāḍiho

Gaurāṅgera Duṭī-Pada

Gāy Gorā Madhura Svare

Gopīnātha

Gurudeva, Boḍo Kṛpa Kori’

Gurudeva! Kabe Mora Sei Dina Ha’be

Gurudeva! Kabe Tava Karunā Prakāśe

Gurudeva! Kṛpā-Bindu Diyā

Hā Hā Morā Gaura-Kiśora

Hari Bole Modera Gaura Elo

Hari Haraye Namaḥ Kṛṣṇa (Nāma–Saṅkīrtana)

hari hari kabe mora ha’be heno dina (Bimala Vaiṣṇava)

Hari Hari, Kabe More Hoibe Sudina

Hari Hari! Biphale Janama Gõāinu

Hari Hari! Kabe Habo Vṛndāvana-Vāsī

Hari Hari! Kabe Heno Daśā Ha’be Mora

Hari He Doyāla Mora

Hari He! Tomāre Bhuliyā

Harināma, Tuwā Aneka Svarūpa

Janama Saphala Tā’ra

Jaya Jaya Harināma

Jaya Jaya Nityānanda Rohiṇī-Kumāra

Jaya Jaya Nityānandādvaita Gaurāṅga

Jaya Jaya Rādhe Kṛṣṇa Govinda

Jaya Jaya Śrī Guru, Prema-Kalpa-Taru

jaya nanda-nandana, gopī-jana-ballabha (Śrī Gaura-Rūpa-
Guṇa-Varnana

Jaya Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Gīti

Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava

jaya rādhe, jaya kṛṣṇa, jaya vṛndāvana (Śrī Vraja-Dhāma-

                             3
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Mahimāmṛta)

Je Ānilo Prema-Dhana

Jīva Jāgo, Jīva Jāgo

Kabe Āhā Gaurāṅga Boliyā

Kabe Gaura-Vane

Kabe Ha’be Bolo

kabe ha’be heno daśa mor (Navadvīpa Bhajana-Kuṭira)

Kabe Kṛṣṇa-Dhana Pābo

Kabe Śrī Caitanya More

Kaha Nā Gaura Kathā

Kali-Kukkura

Ke Jābi Ke Jābi Bhāi?

Ki-Rūpe Pāibo Sevā

kothāya go premamayi rādhe rādhe (Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmīra)

Kṛpā Koro Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura

Mādhava, Bahuta Minati Kori Toya

Mama Mana Mandire

Mānasa, Deho, Geho

Nadīyā-Godrume

Nagara Bhramiyā Āmāra Gaura

Nārada Muni

Nitāi-Gaura Nāma

Nitāi Guṇa Maṇi

Nitāi-Pada-Kamala (Śrī Nityānanda-Niṣṭhā)

Ohe, Premera Ṭhākura Gorā

Ohe! Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura

Pālya-Dāsī Kori’

Parama Koruṇa

Prabhu Tava Pada-yuge

Prasāda-Sevāya

Rādhā-Bhajane Jadi

Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Bol

                              4
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Prāṇa Mora (Sakhī-Vṛnda Vijñapti)

Rādhā-Kuṇḍa-Taṭa

Rādhikā-Caraṇa-Padma

rādhikā-caraṇa-renu (Śrī-Rādhā-Niṣṭhā)

Ramaṇī-Śiromaṇi

Rasika Nāgarī

Sakala Vaiṣṇava Gosāi

Śarīra Avidyā-Jāl

Sarvasva Tomāra

Śata-Koṭi Gopī

Soi (Sakhi), Kebā Sunāili Śyāma-Nāma

Śrī Guru-Caraṇa-Padma

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu Doyā Koro More

śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya prabhu jīve doyā (Ṣaḍ-Aṅga
Śaraṇāgati)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Virahe

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Pada-Kamale (Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Vijñapti)

Śrī Rūpa-Mañjarī Pada

Śrī Rūpānugatya-Māhātmya—Śuniyāchi Sādhu-Mukhe

Śrī Vaiṣṇava-Vandanā

Śrīman Mahāprabhu Hari-Vāsara Vrata-Pālana

Śuddha-Bhakata

Sukhera Lāgiyā

Śuno, He Rasika Jana

Ṭhākura Vaiṣṇava-Gaṇa

Ṭhākura Vaiṣṇava-Pada

Tuhó Se Rohili Madhupūra

Tumi Sarveśvareśvara

Udilo Aruna (Aruṇodoya-Kīrtana)

Varaja-Vipine

Vibhāvarī Śeṣa – End of Night

Viṣaya-Vāsanā-Rūpa


                           5
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Vṛndāvana Ramya-Sthāna

Vṛndāvana-Vilāsinī, Rādhe Rādhe

Vṛṣabhānu-Sutā

Yamunā-Puline

Yaṅ Kali Rūpa

Yaśomatī-Nandana



Sanskrit Songs

(Kṛṣṇa) Deva! Bhavantaṁ Vande

Dhira Samire (Rati Sukha Sāre)

Gopī Gītā

Hari Hari Govinda Hari

Jaya Jaya Sundara Nanda-Kumāra

Jaya Śacīnandana Jaya Gaurahari

Kalayati Nayanaṁ

Lalita-Lavaṅga

Nāma-kīrtana

rādhe! jaya jaya mādhava-dayite (Gītam—Śrī Śrī Rādhikā
Pāda-Padme Vijñapti)

Śrī Anurāga-Valli

Śrī Caitanyāṣṭakam

Śrī Caurāgragaṇya-Puruṣāṣṭakam

Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam

Śrī Daśāvatāra-Stotram

Śrī Gāndharvā-Samprārthanāṣṭakam

Śrī Gaura-Gīti

Śrī Gadādharāṣṭakam

Śrī Govardhana-Vāsa-Prārthanā-Daśakam

Śrī Govardhanāṣṭakam

Śrī Jagannāthāṣṭakam

Śrī Keśavācāryāṣṭakam

Śrī Keśavāṣṭaka

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Candrāṣṭakam

                           6
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                5/5/2017


Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Nāmāṣṭakam

Śrī Kuñja Bihārī Aṣṭakam

Śrī Lalitāṣṭakam

Śrī Madhurāṣṭakam

Śrī Nanda-Nandanāṣṭakam

Śrī Navadvīpāṣṭakam

Śrī Nityānandāṣṭakam

Śrī Prabhupāda-Pādma-Stavaḥ

Śrī Rādhā Vinoda-Bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛpā-Kaṭākṣa-Stava-Rāja

Śrī Rādhā-Kuṇḍāṣṭakam

Śrī Rādhā-Prārthanā

Śrī Rādhā-Stotram

Śrī Rādhikāṣṭakam (1)

Śrī Rādhikāṣṭakam (2)

Śrī Rādhikāṣṭakam (3)

Śrī Śacī-Sūnvāṣṭakam

Śrī Śacī-Tanayāṣṭakam

Śrī Ṣaḍ-Gosvāmyaṣṭakam

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam

Śrī Śyāma-Kuṇḍāṣṭakam

Śrī Vraja-Rāja-Sutāṣṭakam

Śrī Vṛndā-Devyaṣṭakam

Śrī Vṛndāvanāṣṭakam

Śrī Yugala-Kiśorāṣṭakam

Śrīta Kamala (Śrī Maṅgala-gītam)

Vande Viśvambhara

Vasatu Mano Mama Madana-Gopāle



HINDI SONGS

Ālī! Mohe Lāge Vṛndāvana Nīko

Guru-Caraṇa-Kamala Bhaja Mana

                              7
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


Gurudeva, Kṛpa Karke

Pāra Kareṇge

Rādhā-Nāma Parama Sukhadāī

Vraja Jana Mana Sukhakārī




Maṅgalācaraṇa


vande’haṁ śrī-guroḥ śrī-yuta-pada-kamalaṁ śrī-gurūn
vaiṣṇavāṁś ca

śrī rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha-gaṇa-raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa-
jīvam

sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana-sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-
devam

śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pādān saha-gaṇa-lalitā-śrī-
viśākhānvitāṁś ca

I offer praṇāmas to the lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva (who
includes śrī dīksā-guru and bhajana-śikṣā-guru), guru-
varga (our entire disciplic succession) and all other
Vaiṣṇavas, to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, his elder brother Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, Jīva
Gosvāmī and their associates, to Śrī Advaita Prabhu, Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His
associates, and to the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
accompanied by Śrī Lalitā and Viśākhā and all the other
sakhīs.



Samaṣṭigata praṇāma

gurave gauracandrāya rādhikāyai tadālaye

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-bhaktāya tad-bhaktāya namo namaḥ

I offer my obeisances time and again unto Śrī Gurudeva,
Śrī Gauracandra, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her associates,
unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His devotees, and unto the devotees
of His devotees.



Śrī Guru-Praṇāma

oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana-śalākayā

caksur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-guruve namaḥ

O Gurudeva, you are so merciful. I offer my humble
praṇāma to you and am praying from the core of my heart
that, with the torchlight of divine knowledge, you open
my eyes which have been blinded by the darkness of

                             8
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

ignorance.



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī-Vandanā

namaḥ oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya rādhikāya-priyātmane

śrī-śrīmad-bhakti-vedānta nārāyaṇa iti nāmine (1)

I offer praṇāma to oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja who is very dear to Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



śrī-kṛṣṇa-līlā-kathane sudakṣaṁ audārya-mādhurya guṇaiś
ca yuktaṁ

varaṁ vareṇyaṁ puruṣaṁ mahāntaṁ nārāyaṇaṁ tvaṁ śirasā
namāmi (2)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is expert in describing kṛṣṇa-
līlā. He is endowed with the qualities of magnanimity
and sweetness, and he is the best of the great souls.
Because he is always relishing Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness, he is
able to freely distribute that sweetness to others. I
bow down and place my head at his lotus feet.



tridaṇḍīnāṁ bhakta-śiromaṇim ca śrī-kṛṣṇa-padābja-
dhṛtaika-hṛdi

caitanya-līlāmṛta-sāra sāraṁ nārāyāṇaṁ tvaṁ satataṁ
prapadye (3)

Tridaṇḍī-sannyāsī Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, the crown-
jewel of bhaktas, always keeps in his heart the lotus
feet of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, especially when Kṛṣṇa serves
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He deeply meditates on Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and the internal reasons for His descent. I
bow down to the lotus feet of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,
who possesses innumerable transcendental qualities.



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī-vandanā

nama oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale

śrīmate bhakti-vedānta-svāmin iti nāmine

I offer praṇāma unto oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja, who is very dear to Kṛṣṇa,
having taken shelter at His lotus feet.



namas te sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe

nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe

Our respectful obeisances unto you, O servant of
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī. You are kindly preaching the message

                           9
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

of Gaurasundara and delivering the Western countries
which are filled with impersonalism and voidism.



Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī-praṇāma

namaḥ oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya ācārya-siṁha-rūpiṇe

śrī-śrīmad-bhakti-prajñāna-keśava iti nāmine

atimartya-caritrāya sva-śritānāṣ ca pāline

jīva-duḥkhe sadārttāya śrī-nāma-prema-dāyine

I offer praṇāmas unto the most worshipable lion-like
ācārya, jagad-guru oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who
nurtures with extreme, divine affection as a parental
guardian those who take shelter of him, who is always
genuinely unhappy to see the suffering jīvas who have
turned away from Kṛṣṇa, and who is bestowing upon them
śrī nāma along with prema.



gaurāśraya-vigrahāya kṛṣṇa-kāmaika-cāriṇe

rūpānuga-pravarāya vinodeti-svarūpiṇe

He is the manifestation of the receptacle of
Mahāprabhu’s prema, the topmost preacher of prema-bhakti
in the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and his name is
Vinoda because he is very skillful in giving pleasure
(vinoda) to Vinodinī Rādhikā and to Mahāprabhu.



Śrīla Prabhupāda-vandanā

namaḥ oṁ viṣṇu-padāya kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya bhūtale

śrīmate bhakti-siddhānta-sarasvatīti-nāmine

śrī-vārṣabhānavī-devī-dayitāya kṛpābdhaye

kṛsṇa-sambandha-vijñāna-dāyine prabhave namaḥ

I offer praṇāma unto oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda,
who is very dear to Kṛṣṇa, who is most beloved to Śrī
Vārṣabhānavī-devī Rādhikā, who is an ocean of mercy, and
who is kindly bestowing realization (sambandha-vijñāna)
of our eternal relationship with Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.



mādhuryojjvala-premāḍhya-śrī-rūpānuga-bhakti-da

śrī-gaura-karuṇā-śakti-vigrahāya namo’stu te

Again and again I offer obeisances unto Śrīla Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura, who is the mercy incarnate of Śrī Gaurāṇga
Mahāprabhu (who descended upon the earth to bestow

                           10
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

ujjvala-mādhurya-rasa, full conjugal prema), and who is
the embodiment of the line of śrī rūpānuga-bhakti.



namas te gaura-vāṇī-śrī-mūrtaye dīna-tāriṇe

rūpānuga-viruddhāpasiddhānta-dhvānta-hāriṇe

I offer obeisances unto Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who is
the embodiment of Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu’s teachings
(vāṇi). You deliver the fallen souls and you annihilate
the darkness arising from misconceptions (apasiddhānta)
which are opposed (viruddha) to the precepts enunciated
by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.



Śrīla Gaura Kiśora-vandanā

namo gaura-kiśorāya sākṣād-vairāgya mūrtaye

vipralambha-rasāmbhodhe! pādāmbujāya te namaḥ

I offer praṇāma unto the lotus feet of Śrī Gaura Kiśora,
who is renunciation personified and an ocean of
vipralambha-rasa, always being absorbed in the mellow of
divine separation from Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda-vandanā

namo bhaktivinodāya sac-cid-ānanda-nāmine

gaura-śakti-svarūpāya rūpānuga-varāya te

I offer praṇāma unto Saccidānanda Śrī Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, who is the foremost of rūpānugas and the
embodiment (prakāśa) of Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu’s śakti,
Gadādhara Paṇḍita.



Śrīla Jagannātha-vandanā

gaurāvirbhāva-bhūmes tvaṁ nirdeṣṭā sajjana-priyaḥ

vaiṣṇava-sārvabhauma śrī-jagannāthāya te namaḥ

I offer praṇāma unto the topmost Vaiṣnava, Śrī
Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, who verified the
appearance place of Śrī Gaurasundara and who is so dear
to all saintly devotees.

Śrī Vaiṣṇava-vandanā

vāñchā-kalpa-tarubyaś ca kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca

patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ

I offer praṇāmas unto the Vaiṣṇavas, who are just like
wish-fulfilling desire trees, who are an ocean of mercy,
and who deliver the fallen, conditioned souls.

                             11
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017




Śrīman Mahāprabhu-vandanā

namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne gaura-tviṣe namaḥ

I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Kṛsṇa-Caitanya, who is Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Himself. Having assumed the golden hue of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, He is munificently bestowing kṛṣṇa-prema, the
rarest of all gifts.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa-praṇāma

he kṛṣṇa! karuṇā-sindho! dīna-bandho! jagat-pate!

gopeśa! gopikā-kānta! rādhā-kānta! namo’stu te

I offer my unlimited praṇāmas unto You, O Kṛṣṇa! You are
the ocean of mercy, friend of the fallen, Lord of
creation, and master of the cowherd community! You are
Gopī-kānta, beloved of the gopīs, and above all You are
Rādhā-kānta, the beloved of Śrīmatī Rādhikā!



Śrī Rādhā-praṇāma

tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi! rādhe! vṛndāvaneśvari!

vṛṣabhānu-sute! devī! praṇamāmi hari-priye!

O Gaurāṅgī, whose complexion is like molten gold! O
Rādhe! Queen of Vṛndāvana! O daughter of Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja! O Devī! O dearmost of Hari! Praṇāmas unto You
again and again!



Śrī Sambandhādhideva-praṇāma

jayatāṁ suratau paṅgor mama manda-mater gatī

mat-sarvasva-padāmbhojau rādhā-madana-mohanau

All glories to the all-merciful Śrī Rādhā-Madana-Mohana!
Although I am lame, foolish and devoid of intelligence,
Your lotus feet are my refuge and my everything!



Śrī Abhidheyādhideva-praṇāma

dīvyad-vṛndāraṇya-kalpa-drumādhaḥ

śrīmad ratnāgāra-siṁhāsana-sthau

śrī-śrī-rādhā-śrīla-govinda-devau

preṣṭhālībhiḥ sevyamānau smarāmi

                            12
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


I meditate upon Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda-deva, who are
seated beneath a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree on an effulgent
bejeweled siṁhāsana in the supremely beautiful land of
Vṛndāvana, where They are always being served by Their
beloved sakhīs, headed by Lalitā and Viśakhā.



Śrī Prayojanādhideva-praṇāma

śrīmān rāsa-rasārambhī vaṁśīvaṭa-taṭa-sthitaḥ

karṣan venu-svanair gopīr gopīnāthaḥ śriye’stu naḥ

Śrī Gopīnātha, who originated the transcendental mellow
of the rāsa dance, always stands beneath the Vaṁśī-vaṭa
tree, attracting all the kiśori-gopīs with the sound of
His flute, thereby showering me with auspiciousness.



Śrī Tulasī-praṇāma

vṛndāyai tulasī-devyai priyāyai keśavasya ca

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-prade devī! satyavatyai namo namaḥ

I offer praṇāmas again and again to Tulasī-devī, who is
most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and who is also renowned as
Vṛṇdā-devī and Satyavatī (the embodiment of pure truth).
O Devī! You are the bestower of kṛṣṇa-bhakti!



Śrī Pañca-tattva-praṇāma

pañca-tattvātmakaṁ kṛṣṇaṁ bhakta-rūpa-svarūpakam

bhaktāvatāraṁ bhaktākhyaṁ namāmi bhakta-śaktikam

I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu in
His five features as bhakta-rūpa (Mahāprabhu), bhakta-
svarūpa (Nityānanda P.), bhakta-avatāra (Advaita
Ācārya), bhakta (Śrīvāsa) and bhakta-śakti (Gadadhāra
Paṇḍita).



Śrī Pañca-tattva

śrī kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu-nityānanda

śrī advaita gadādhara śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda



Mahā-mantra

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



                           13
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


Śrī Nāma-vandanā

jayati jayati nāmānanda-rūpaṁ murārer

viramita-nija-dharma-dhyāna-pūjādi-yatnam

katham api sakṛd āttaṁ mukti-daṁ prāṇināṁ yat

parama amṛtam ekaṁ jīvanaṁ bhūṣaṇaṁ me (1)

(Śrī Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam 1.9, Sanātana Gosvāmī)

All glories, all glories to the name of Kṛṣṇa-Murāri,
the enemy of lust and the embodiment of divine bliss! It
halts the cycle of birth and death and relieves one of
all painful endeavors in practicing religion,
meditation, charity, deity worship and austerity. It
awards liberation to one who utters it even once. Kṛṣṇa-
nāma stands alone as the supreme nectar and sole
treasure of my life.



madhura-madhuram etan maṅgalāṁ maṅgalānāṁ

sakala-nigama-vallī-sat-phalaṁ cit-svarūpam

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛgu-vara! nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma (2)

(Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 11.234)

Kṛṣṇa-nāma is the sweetest of the sweet and the most
auspicious of all that is auspicious. It is the fully-
ripened fruit of the Veda’s flourishing creeper (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam) and the embodiment of knowledge, cit-śakti.
O best of the Bhṛgu dynasty! Even if someone chants the
holy name only once, with faith or indifference (helā),
he is immediately delivered from this ocean of birth and
death!



Śrī Guru-vandanā

nāma-śreṣthaṁ manum api śacī-putram atra svarūpaṁ

rūpaṁ tasyāgrajam urū-pūriṁ māthurīṁ goṣthavāṭīm

rādhā-kuṇḍaṁ giri-varam aho! rādhikā-mādhavāśāṁ

prāpto yasya prathita-kṛpayā śrī guruṁ taṁ nato’smi (1)

(Śrī Mukta-caritam, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī)

I am fully indebted to Śrī Gurudeva, because he is
giving me so many things. He is giving me the holy name
containing the highest form of thought, aspiration, and
ideal, and he is giving me the service of that great
savior, the son of Mother Śacī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
who is like a golden mountain indicating the way to
kṛṣṇa-līlā. And Śrī Gurudeva has brought me to Svarūpa

                              14
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

Dāmodara, who is Lalitā-devī, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s closest
friend.Then he has brought me to Śrī Rūpa, who was
ordered to distribute rasa-tattva, and then to Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī, who adjusts our position in relation
to rāgānugā-bhakti. Gurudeva has brought me to Mathurā
Maṇḍala, where Rādhā and Govinda have their pastimes,
where the forests, hills, and every creeper, shrub and
grain of sand are uddīpana (stimuli) to help me remember
Rādhā and Govinda. He has given me Rādhā-kuṇḍa and
Girirāja Govardhana, and aho! he has given me assurance
of all these, so I bow my head with deep respect unto
his lotus feet.

(translation by Śrīla B.R. Śrīdhara Gosvāmī Mahārāja)



namas te gurudevāya sarva-siddhi-pradāyine

sarva-maṅgala-rūpāya sarvānanda-vidhāyine (2)

I offer praṇāma unto Śrīla Gurudeva, who is the
embodiment of all auspiciousness and who bestows all
spiritual perfection and happiness.



yaṁ pravrajantam anupetam apeta-kṛtyaṁ

dvaipāyano viraha-kātara ājuhāva

putreti tan-mayatayā taravo ‘bhinedus

taṁ sarva-bhūta-hṛdayaṁ munim ānato ‘smi (3)

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.2)

I offer praṇāma to Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who can enter
the hearts of all living beings. When he left home
without undergoing the purificatory processes, such as
accepting the sacred thread, his father Vyāsa cried out,
“O my son!” As if they were absorbed in that same
feeling of separation, only the trees echoed in response
to his call.



he śrī-guro jñāna-da dīna-bandho svānanda-dātaḥ
karuṇaika-sindho

vṛndāvanāsīna hitāvatāra prasīda rādhā-praṇaya-pracāra
(4)

(Arcana Paddhati)

O Gurudeva! You bestow transcendental knowledge, you are
the friend of the fallen, you bestow the spiritual bliss
which exists within your own heart, you are an ocean of
mercy, you are a resident of Vṛndāvana, you are the
incarnation of auspiciousness, and you preach about
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s love for Kṛṣṇa. Please be merciful to
me.



                            15
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


trāyasva bho jagannātha guro saṁsāra-vahninā

dagdhaṁ māṁ kāla-daṣṭaṁ ca tvām ahaṁ śaraṇaṁ gataḥ (5)

O Gurudeva, master of this world! Seeing that material
existence is like a blazing forest fire which resembles
the devouring teeth of Yamarāja, I take shelter of you
and appeal to you for deliverance.



Śrī Guru-rūpa sakhī-praṇāma

rādhā-sanmukha-saṁsaktiṁ sakhī-saṅga-nivāsinīm

tām ahaṁ satataṁ vande guru-rūpāṁ parāṁ sakhīm

I forever worship my Guru, who in his form as an exalted
sakhī is happily immersed in the company of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and the other sakhīs.



Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī-vandanā

vairāgya-yug bhakti-rasaṁ prayatnair

apāyayan mām anabhīpsum andham

kṛpāmbudhir yaḥ para-duḥkha-duḥkhī

sanātanāṁ taṁ prabhum āśrayāmi

(Vilāpa-kusumāñjali 6, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī)

I was unwilling to drink the nectar of bhakti-rasa laced
with renunciation, but Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, being an
ocean of mercy who cannot tolerate the sufferings of
others, induced me to drink it. Therefore, I take
shelter of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī as my śikṣa-guru.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī-vandanā

śrī caitanya mano’bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhūtale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam (1)

(Prema-bhakti-candrikā, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura)

When will Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī give me the shelter of his
lotus feet? Because he understood the innermost desire
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he was able to establish His
mission in this world and is very dear to the Lord.



ādadānas tṛṇaṁ dantair idaṁ yāce punaḥ punaḥ

śrīmad-rūpa-padāmbhoja-dhuliḥ syāṁ janma-janmani (2)

(Dāna Keli Cintāmaṇi 175, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī)

Clasping a straw between my teeth, I repeatedly beg to

                              16
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

attain the dust of the lotus feet of Śrīmad Rūpa Gosvāmī
birth after birth.



Śrīman Mahāprabhu-vijñapti

anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ (1)

(Vidagdha Mādhava, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī)

May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacīdevī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what has not been given in a
very long time—mañjarī-bhāva, the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā as Her confidential maidservant.



saṁsāra-duḥkha-jaladhau patitasya kāma-

krodhādi-nakra-makaraiḥ kavalī-kṛtasya

durvāsanā-nigaḍitasya nirāśrayasya

caitanya-candra mama dehi padāvalambam (2)

(Caitanya-Candrāmṛtam, Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī)

O Caitanya-candra! Trapped in the evil net of material
existence, I have fallen into an ocean of misery where I
am being devoured by the crocodiles and sharks of lust,
anger, greed, and so forth. Please give this destitute
person, who is chained to wicked desires, shelter at
Your feet.



caitanya-candra mama hṛt-kumudaṁ vikāśya

hṛdyaṁ vidhehi nija-cintana-bhṛṅga-raṅgaiḥ

kiñcāparādha-timiraṁ nibiḍaṁ vidhūya

pādāmṛtaṁ sadaya pāyaya durgataṁ mām (3)

(Stavāvali, Abhīṣṭa-sūcanam 11, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī)

O Caitanya-candra! I implore You to please make the
lotus flower of my heart bloom so that it will first
attract and then enclose the bumblebee of remembrance of
You. O merciful Lord! My second request is that after
destroying the dense darkness of my offences, please
make this miserable person drink the nectar of Your
feet.

                             17
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017




ānanda līlāmaya vigrhāya hemābha-divyac chavi sundarāya

tasmai mahāprema-rasa-pradāya caitanya-cāndrāya-namo
namaste (4)

(Caitanya Candrāmṛta, Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī)

I offer pranāṁa to Śrī Caitanya-candra, whose form is
the embodiment of blissful transcendental pastimes,
whose golden complexion is divinely beautiful, and who
bestows unlimited nectar of prema.



Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu-praṇāma

saṅkarṣaṇaḥ kāraṇa-toya-śāyī

garbhoda-śāyī ca payobdhi-śāyī

śeṣaś ca yasyāṁśa-kalāḥ sa nityā-

nandākhya-rāmaḥ śaraṇaṁ mamāstu (1)

(Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī’s Diary)

Saṅkarṣaṇa, Śeṣa Nāga and the Viṣṇus who lie on the
Kāraṇa, Garbha, and Kṣīra Oceans, are the plenary
portions and portions of the plenary portions of Śrī
Nityānanda Rāma. May He give me shelter.



nityānanda namas tubhyaṁ premānanda-pradāyine

kalau kalmaṣa-nāśāya jāhnavā-pataye namaḥ (2)

I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu who bestows
the bliss of divine love, who eliminates the filth of
the age of Kali, and who is the master of Jāhnavā-devī.



Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda-praṇāma

ājānu-lambita-bhujau kanakāvadātau

saṅkīrtanaika-pitarau kamalāyatākṣau

viśvambharau dvija-varau yuga-dharma-pālau

vande jagat-priya-karau karuṇāvatārau

(Caitanya Bhāgavat, Śrī Vṛndāvan dāsa Ṭhākura)

I worship the incarnations of mercy, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, whose arms extend
to Their knees, whose complexions are a resplendent
yellow and very enchanting like the hue of gold, who
inaugurated the saṅkīrtana movement, whose eyes are
large like lotus petals, who nourish the entire

                           18
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

universe, who appeared in the families of exalted
brāhmaṇas, who protect the yuga-dharma, and who bestow
the highest auspiciousness upon the residents of the
material world.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa-dhyānam

barhāpīḍābhirāmaṁ mṛga-mada-tilakaṁ kuṇḍalākrānta-gaṇḍaṁ

kañjākṣaṁ kambu-kaṇṭhaṁ smita-subhaga-mukhaṁ svādhare
nyasta-veṇum

śyāmaṁ śāntaṁ tri-bhaṅgaṁ ravi-kara-vasanaṁ bhūṣitaṁ
vaijayantyā

vande vṛndāvana-sthaṁ yuvati-śata-vṛṭaṁ brahma gopāla-
veśam (1)

I worship that Parabrahma—whose crown is decorated with
a peacock feather, whose large forehead is marked with
tilaka of musk and saffron candana, whose fish-shaped
earrings cast a shadow upon His charming cheeks which
themselves pulverize the pride of sapphire, whose eyes
resemble fully-blossomed lotus flowers, whose neck
tapers like a conchshell, whose lotus face is graced
with a gentle smile, who holds a flute to His bimba-
fruit-like lips, whose bodily complexion is like that of
a fresh monsoon cloud, who is supremely peaceful, who
stands in a delightful three-fold bending posture, whose
yellow cloth is resplendent like the rays of the sun,
who is adorned with a vaijayantī flower garland, who is
surrounded on all sides by thousands of gopīs, and who
resides in Śrī Dhāma-Vṛndāvana dressed as a cowherd boy.



kasturī-tilakaṁ lalāṭa-paṭale vakṣaḥ-sthale kaustubhaṁ

nāsāgre vara-mauktikaṁ kara-tale veṇuḥ kare kaṅkaṇam

sarvāṅge hari-candanaṁ sulalitaṁ kaṇṭhe ca muktāvalī

gopa-strī-pariveṣṭito vijayate gopāla-cūḍāmaṇiḥ (2)

His forehead is decorated with musk tilaka, upon His
chest rests the Kaustubha jewel, an exquisite pearl
adorns the tip of His nose, His lotus hand holds the
flute, bracelets adorn His wrists, His entire form is
anointed with candana, a necklace of pearls graces His
charming neck, and He is surrounded by cowherd maidens—
all glories unto He who is the crest-jewel of cowherd
boys!



vaṁśī-nyastāsya-candraṁ smita-yutam atulaṁ pīta-vastraṁ
vareṇyaṁ

kañjākṣaṁ sarva-dakṣaṁ nava-ghana-sadṛśaṁ barha-cūḍaṁ
śaraṇyam

trai-bhaṅgair bhaṅgimāṅgaṁ vraja-yuvati-yutaṁ dhvasta-

                           19
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

keśyādi-śūraṁ

vande śrī-nanda-sūnuṁ madhura-rasa-tanuṁ dhurya-
mādhurya-pūram (3)

I worship Śrī Nanda-nandana, who holds a flute to His
lips, whose gentle smile exudes an incomparable
brilliance, who is attired in excellent yellow cloth,
whose eyes are like lotuses, who is expert in all the
arts, whose bodily complexion is like that of a fresh
monsoon cloud, whose head is adorned with a peacock-
feather crown, who is the shelter for those who are
surrendered to Him, who stands in a delightful three-
fold bending posture, who is surrounded by the youthful
maidens of Vraja, who subdues Keśī and other demons, who
is the crest-jewel of infinite sweetnesses, and is the
very embodiment of mādhurya-rasa.



phullendīvara-kāntim indu-vadanaṁ barhāvataṁsa-priyaṁ

śrī-vatsāṇkam udāra-kaustubha-dharaṁ pītāmbaraṁ sundaram

gopīnāṁ nayanotpalārcita-tanuṁ go-gopa-saṅghāvṛtaṁ

govindaṁ kala-veṇu-vādana-paraṁ divyāṅga-bhūṣaṁ bhaje
(4)

I worship Govinda, whose complexion is the color of a
blossoming blue lotus flower, whose face is like the
moon, who is fond of wearing a peacock feather in His
crown, whose chest bears the mark of Śrīvatsa and is
adorned with the Kaustubha gem, who is attired in
beautiful yellow garments, whose handsome form the gopīs
worship with sidelong glances, whose companions are
multitudes of cows and gopas, who plays sweet melodies
on the flute, and whose body is decorated with
glittering ornaments.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa-praṇāma

namo nalina-netrāya veṇu-vādya-vinodine

rādhādhara-sudhā-pāna-śāline vana-māline (1)

I offer praṇāma unto He whose eyes are like lotus
flowers, who merrily plays the flute, who is expert in
drinking the nectar of Rādhikā’s lips, and who is
adorned with a garland of forest flowers.



kṛṣṇāya vāsudevāya haraye paramātmane

praṇata-kleśa-nāśāya govindāya namo namaḥ (2)

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavtam 10.73.16)

Time and again I offer praṇāmas unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
the son of Vasudeva, and the remover of His devotees’
material attachments.

                              20
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017




Śrī Rādhikā-dhyānam

amala-kamala-kāntiṁ nīla-vastrāṁ sukeśīṁ

śaśadhara-sama-vaktrāṁ khañjanākṣīṁ manojñām

stana-yuga-gata-muktādāma-dīptāṁ kiśorīṁ

vraja-pati-suta-kāntāṁ rādhikām āśraye ’ham (1)

(Stava-mālā, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī)

I take shelter of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose complexion is
like that of a spotless lotus flower, who is attired in
blue cloth, whose hair is very beautiful, whose face is
like the full moon, whose charming, restless eyes are
like khañjarīṭa birds (wagtails), upon whose breasts
rests a radiant pearl necklace, who is eternally
youthful, and who is the dearmost lover of the son of
Nanda Mahārāja.



bhajāmi rādhāṁ aravinda-netrāṁ

smarāmi rādhāṁ madhura-smitāsyāṁ

vadāmi rādhāṁ karuṇā-bharārdrāṁ

tato mamānyāsti gatir na kāpi (2)

(Stavāvali, Viśākhānandadabhiḥ stotram 131, Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa)

I worship Rādhā who has lotus eyes, I remember Rādhā who
has a sweet smile, and I speak of Rādhā who is melted
with compassion. There is nothing else for me. She is my
life and soul.

Vijñapti

hā! devi kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya-vācā

yāce nipatya bhuvi daṇḍavad udbhaṭārtiḥ

asya prasādam abudhasya janasya kṛtvā

gāndharvike nija-gaṇe gaṇanāṁ vidhehi (1)

(Gāndharvā-samprārthanāṣṭakam, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī)

O Devī Gāndharvike! In utter desperation I throw myself
on the ground like a stick and with a choked voice
humbly implore You to please be merciful to this fool
and count me as one of Your own.



rādhe vṛndāvanādhīśe karuṇāmṛta-vāhini

kṛpayā nija-pādābja-dāsyaṁ mahyaṁ pradīyatām (3)

                           21
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


(Arcana Paddhati)

O Rādhe, queen of Vṛndāvana, vessel of nectarean mercy!
Please bestow upon me the service of Your lotus feet.



yat-kiṅkarīṣu bahuśaḥ khalu kāku-vāṇī

nityaṁ parasya puruṣasya śikhaṇḍa-mauleḥ

tasyāḥ kadā rasa-nidher vṛṣabhānu-jāyās

tat-keli-kuñja-bhavanāṅgana-mārjanī syām? (4)

(Rādhā-Rasa-Sudhā-Nidhi 8, Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī)

O daughter of Vṛṣabhanu Mahārāja, O ocean of rasa! The
Supreme Bhagavān, the source of all avatāras who wears a
peacock feather in His hair, falls at the feet of Your
maidservants and propitiates them with many humble and
griefstricken words to be allowed entrance into Your
kuñja where You engage in playful, amorous pastimes. If
only I could become one stick in the broom used by Your
sakhīs to clean Your delightful grove, I would consider
my life a success.



Śrī Yugala-kiśora-dhyānam

kanaka-jalada-gātrau nīla-śoṇābja-netrau

mṛgamada-vara-bhālau mālatī-kunda-mālau

tarala-taruṇa-veśau nīla-pītāmbareśau

smara nibhṛta-nikuñje rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau (1)

(Nikuñja Rahasya Stava 16, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī)

O mind, exclusively meditate on Śrīmati Rādhikā and
Kṛṣṇacandra—Her bodily complexion is like gold and His
is like a fresh monsoon cloud; Her eyes are like blue
lotus flowers and His like red lotuses; Their foreheads
are decorated with musk tilaka; She wears a garland of
mālatī flowers around Her neck and He of kunda flowers;
and They are wonderfully decorated in a charming and
youthful fashion, She wearing a blue dress and He a
yellow garment—as They enjoy Their pastimes in the
solitary nikuñjas of Vraja.



aṅga-śyāmalima-chaṭābhir abhito mandīkṛtendīvaraṁ

jāḍyaṁ jāguḍa-rociṣāṁ vidadhataṁ paṭṭāmbarasya śriyā

vṛndāraṇya-nivāsinaṁ hṛdi lasad-dāmābhir āmodaraṁ

rādhā-skandha-niveśitojjvala-bhujaṁ dhyāyema dāmodaram
(2)


                            22
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

(Stava-mālā, Rādhā-Dāmodara Dhyānam, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī)

I meditate upon that Śrī Dāmodara—whose dark bodily
luster is millions of times more beautiful than the blue
lotus flower, whose brilliant yellow garments rebuke the
radiance of golden kuṅkuma, whose residence is Śrī
Vṛndāvana-dhāma, whose chest is beautified by a swinging
vaijayantī garland, and whose splendorous left hand
rests upon the right shoulder of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma-praṇāma

navīna-śrī-bhaktiṁ nava-kanaka-gaurākṛti-patiṁ

navāraṇya-śreṇī-nava-sura-sarid-vāta-valitam

navīna-śrī-rādhā-hari-rasamayotkīrtana-vidhiṁ

navadvīpaṁ vande nava-karuṇa-mādyan nava-rucim

(Navadvīpa Śataka, Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī)

I worship Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, where Kṛṣṇa appeared in a
golden form to bestow that bhakti which had never been
given before; where the newly arisen forest is made more
beautiful by the flowing Gaṅgā with her gentle, cool
breezes; where Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī Hari appeared in
a new, combined form to give that kīrtana which is
saturated with rasa; and where an ever-fresh, new taste
(of the original devotional mellow, śṛṅgāra-rasa) is
mercifully bestowed.



Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma-praṇāma

jayati jayati vṛndāraṇyam etan murāreḥ

priyatamam ati-sādhusvānta-vaikuṇṭha-vāsāt

ramayati sa sadā gāḥ pālayan yatra gopīḥ

svarita-madhura-veṇur vardhayan prema rāse

(Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛta 1.5, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī)

All glories, all glories to Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, where
Śrī Murāri enjoys residing more than He does in the
hearts of sādhus or even in Vaikuṇṭha, where He forever
tends cows, and where, by playing sweet melodies on the
flute, He increases the gopīs’ amorous love for Him.



Śrī Paurṇamāsī-devī-praṇāma

rādheśa-keli-prabhutā-vinoda

vinyāsa-vijñāṁ vraja-vanditāṅghrim

kṛpālutādyākhila-viśva-vandyāṁ


                              23
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

śrī-paurṇamāsīṁ śirasā namāmi

I bow my head and offer praṇāma unto Śrī Paurṇamāsī-
devī, who is completely adept at arranging the most
elevated varieties of enjoyment for the master of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā; whose lotus feet are worshiped by the
Vrajavāsīs; and who, due to possessing the entirety of
transcendental qualities starting with kindness, is
worshipable to everyone in the entire universe.



Śrī Paurṇamāsi Yogamāyā praṇāma

kātyāyani mahā-māye mahā-yoginy adhīśvari

nanda-gopa-sutaṁ devi patiṁ me kuru te namaḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.22.4)

O goddess Kātyāyanī, O great potency of the Lord, O
possessor of great mystic power and mighty controller of
all, please make the son of Nanda Mahārāja my husband
(lover). I offer my obeisances unto you.



Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa-vandanā

he śrī sarovara sadā tvayi sā mad-īṣā

praṣṭhena sārdham iha khelati kāma-raṅgaiḥ

tvaṁ cet priyāt priyam atīva tayor itīmāṁ

ha darśayādya kṛpayā mama jīvitaṁ tām

(Vilāpa Kusumāñjali 98, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa)

He Rādhā-kuṇḍa! My mistress is engaging in very secret
and beautiful playful pastimes with Her darling Kṛṣṇa in
the kuñjas on your banks. You are so near and dear to
Them. Therefore I am taking your shelter and praying for
your mercy that you will show me my Svāmīnī, who is my
very life and soul.



Śrī Govardhana-praṇāma

govardhano jayati śaila-kulādhirājo

yo gopikābhir udito hari-dāsa-varyaḥ

kṛṣṇena śakra-makha-bhaṅga-kṛtārcito yaḥ

saptāham asya kara-padma-tale ’py avātsīt (1)

(Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛta 1.7, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī)

Glory to Govardhana Hill, the king of all mountains
including Sumeru, who was given the title hari-dāsa-
varyaḥ, the best servant of Hari, by the gopīs, who was
worshiped by Śrī Kṛṣṇa after He stopped the Vrajavāsīs’

                              24
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

sacrifice to Indra, and who was held in Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
hand for seven days.



saptāham evācyuta-hasta-paṅkaje

bhṛṅgāyamānaṁ phala-mūla-kandaraiḥ

saṁsevyamānaṁ harim ātma-vṛndakair

govardhanādriṁ śirasā namāmi (2)

(Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛta, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī)

I bow my head and offer praṇāma unto Girirāja
Govardhana, who rested upon the lotus hand of Acyuta for
seven days, who is embellished with the humming of black
bees, and who expertly serves Hari and His dearest
devotees by providing caves and kuñjas which supply an
abundance of varieties of fruits, flowers, and roots for
their enjoyment.



Śrī Gopīśvara-śiva-praṇāma

vṛndāvanāvani-pate! jaya soma soma-maule

sanaka-sanandana-sanātana-nāradeḍya

gopīśvara! vraja-vilāsi-yugāṅghri-padme

prema prayaccha nirupādhi namo namas te

(Sankalpa Kalpadruma 103, Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura)

O gatekeeper of Vṛndāvana! O Soma, all glories to you! O
you whose forehead is decorated with the moon, and who
is worshipable for the sages headed by Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanātana and Nārada! O Gopīśvara! Desiring
that you bestow upon me prema for the lotus feet of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava, who perform joyous pastimes in Vraja-
dhāma, I offer praṇāmas unto you time and again.



Śrī Yamunā-praṇāma

cid-ānanda-bhānoḥ sadā nanda-sūnoḥ

para-prema-pātrī drava-brahma-gātrī

aghānāṁ lavitrī jagat-kṣema-dhātrī

pavitrī-kriyān no vapur mitra-putrī (1)

(Śrī Padma Purāṇa)

Yamunā-devī, the daughter of the Sun-god, is a reservoir
of prema for Śrī Nanda-sūnu (son of Nanda), the
embodiment of spiritual bliss. Her liquid body is
completely transcendental, she forgives sins and

                             25
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

offences, and bestows auspiciousness upon the universe.
May that Yamunā-devī purify me.



gaṅgādi-tīrtha-pariṣevita-pāda-padmāṁ

goloka-saukhya-rasa-pūra-mahiṁ mahimnā

āplāvitākhila-sudhā-sujalāṁ sukhābdhau

rādhā-mukunda-muditāṁ yamunāṁ namāmi (2)

(Śrī Padma Purāṇa, Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa)

I offer praṇāmas time and again unto Śrī Yamunā-devī,
whose lotus feet are served by the purifying holy places
headed by the Gaṅgā, who is glorious due to possessing
devotion for Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the mood of mādhurya-rasa, who
is the ocean which immerses everyone in the waters of
nectarean devotional ecstasy, and who always provides
Śrī Rādhā-Mukunda with great happiness.



Śrī Vraja-vāsi-vṛnda-praṇāma

mudā yatra brahmā tṛn-nikara-gulmādiṣu paraṁ

sadā kāṅkṣan janmārpita-vividha-karmāpy anudinam

kramād ye tatraiva vraja-bhuvi vasanti priya-janā

mayā te te vandyāḥ parama-vinayāḥ puṇya-khacitāḥ

(Vraja-vilāsa-stava 100, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī)

Although Brahmā is always very busy carrying out his
many weighty duties, including creating the material
universe, still he longs to take birth in Vṛndāvana as a
blade of grass, a shrub, or in any other species. With
utmost humility I worship each of the dear devotees who
reside in that Vṛndāvana. They are all supremely
worshipable and highly pious.



Śrī Nṛsiṁha-praṇāma

namas te narasiṁhāya prahlādāhlāda-dāyine

hiraṇyakaśipor vakṣaḥ śilā-ṭaṅka-nakhālaye (1)

I offer praṇāma unto Narasiṁha Bhagavān, who gives joy
to Prahlāda Mahārāja and whose nails are like chisels on
the stone-like chest of the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu.



ito nṛsiṁhaḥ parato nṛsiṁho yato yato yāmi tato nṛsiṁhaḥ

bahir nṛsiṁho hṛdaye nṛsiṁho nṛsiṁham ādiṁ śaraṇaṁ
prapadye (3)


                           26
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Nṛsiṁhadeva is here and also there. Wherever I go
Nṛsiṁhadeva is there. He is in the heart and is outside
as well. I surrender unto Nṛsiṁhadeva, the origin of
everything and the supreme refuge.




Jaya-dhvani


Śrī Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga-Gāndharvikā-Giridhārī-Rādhā-
Vinoda-bihārījī kī jaya!

Oṁ viṣṇupāda paramahaṁsa parivrājakācārya aṣṭottara-śata
Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja kī
jaya!

Nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja kī jaya!

Nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedanta Swami Mahārāja kī jaya!

Nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna K eśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja kī jaya!

Nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda kī
jaya!

Nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda paramahaṁsa bābājī Śrī
Śrīla Gaurakiśora dāsa Gosvāmī Mahārāja kī jaya!

Nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda saccidānanda Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura kī jaya!

Nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda vaiṣṇava-sārvabhauma
Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa

Bābājī Mahārāja kī jaya!

Śrī-gauḍīya-vedāntācārya Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa
Prabhu kī jaya!

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura kī jaya!

Śrīla Narottama-Śrīnivāsa-Śyāmānanda prabhutraya kī
jaya!

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī Prabhu kī jaya!

Śrī Rūpa, Sanātana, Bhaṭṭa Raghunātha, Śrī Jīva, Gopāla-
bhaṭṭa, Dāsa Raghunātha ṣaḍ-gosvāmī-prabhu kī jaya!

Śrī Śvarūpa Dāmodara-Rāya Rāmānandādi śrī-gaura-pārṣada-
vṛnda kī jaya!

Nāmācārya Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura kī jaya!

Prema-se kaho Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu Nityānanda Śrī
Advaita Gadādhara Śrīvāsādi śrī-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda kī
jaya!

                           27
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


Śrī Antardvīpa Māyāpura, Sīmantadvīpa, Godrumadvīpa,
Madhyadvīpa, Koladvīpa, Rtudvīpa, Janhudvīpa,
Modradrumadvīpa, Rudradvīpātmaka Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma kī
jaya!

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa gopa-gopī-go-giri-govardhana-dvādaśa
vanātmaka Śrī Vraja- maṇḍala kī jaya!

Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa-Rādhā-kuṇḍa-Yamunā-Gaṅgā-Tulasī-
Bhaktidevī kī jaya!

Sarvābhīṣṭa pradattā Śrī Girirāja Govardhanajī kī jaya!

Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva kī jaya!

Śrī Yoga-māyā Paurṇamāsī devī kī jaya!

Śrīmatī Vṛnda-devī kī jaya!

Śrī Jagannātha-Baladeva-Subhadrā-Sudarśanajī kī jaya!

Śrī Jagannātha Puri Dhāma kī jaya!

Sarva-vighna-vināśaya Nṛsiṁha Bhāgavan kī jaya!

Bhakta-pravara Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja kī jaya!

Cāro dhāma-ācārya-sampradāya vṛnda kī jaya!

Śrī International Pure Bhakti Yoga Society kī jaya!

Ākara maṭha-rāja Śrī Caitanya Maṭha kī jaya!

Śrī Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha aura anyānya śākhā maṭha
samūha kī jaya!

Śrī-harināma-saṅkīrtana kī jaya!

Grantha-rāja Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam kī jaya!

Ananta-koṭi vaiṣṇava-vṛnda kī jaya!

Samāgata bhakta-vṛnda kī jaya!

Śrī-gaura-premānande! hari hari bol!




Bengali Songs




Śrī Guru-Paramparā


Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda




                              28
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa hoite catur-mukha, hoy kṛṣṇa-sevonmukha,

brahmā hoite nāradera mati

nārada hoite vyāsa, madhva kohe vyāsa-dāsa,

pūrṇaprajña padmanābha gati (1)

In the beginning of creation Śrī Kṛṣṇa spoke the science
of devotional service to four-faced Lord Brahmā, who in
turn passed these teachings on to Nārada Muni, who
accepted Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsadeva as his disciple.
Vyāsa transmitted this knowledge to Madhvācārya, who is
also known as Pūrṇaprajña Tīrtha and who was the sole
refuge for his disciple Padmanābha Tīrtha.



nṛhari mādhava-baṁśe, akṣobhya paramahaṁse,

śiṣya boli aṅgīkāra kore

akṣobhyera śiṣya jaya-tīrtha nāme paricaya,

tÃra dāsye jñānasindhu tore (2)

Following in the line of Madhvācārya were Nṛhari Tīrtha
and Mādhava Tīrtha, whose principal disciple was the
great paramahaṁsa Akṣobhya Tīrtha. He in turn accepted
as his disciple Jayatīrtha, who passed his service down
to Jṣānasindhu.



tÃha hoite dayānidhi, tÃra dāsa vidyānidhi,

rājendra hoilo tÃha ha’te

tÃhāra kiṅkora jaya-dharma nāme paricaya,

paramparā jano bhālo mate (3)

From him the line came down to Dayānidhi, then to his
disciple Vidyānidhi, then in turn it was introduced to
Rājendra Tīrtha, whose servant was the renowned
Jayadharma, also known as Vijayadhvaja Tīrtha. In this
way the guru paramparā is properly understood.



jayadharma-dāsye khyāti, śrī puruṣottama jati,

tā ha’te brahmaṇya-tīrtha sūri

vyāsatīrtha tā’ra dāsa, lakṣmīpati vyāsa-dāsa

tÃha haite mādhavendra purī (4)

The great sannyāsī Śrī Puruṣottama Tīrtha was a renowned
disciple in the service of Jayadharma; from Śrī
Puruṣottama the line descended to the powerful
Brahmaṇyatīrtha, then to Vyāsatīrtha. He was succeeded
by Śrī Lakṣmīpati, who passed the line down to Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī.

                             29
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017




mādhavendra purī-bara, śiṣya-bara śrī-īśvara,

nityānanda śri-advaita vibhu

īśvara-purīke dhanya, korilen śri-caitanya,

jagad-guru gaura mahāprabhu (5)

Śrī Iśvara Purī was the most prominent sannyāsa disciple
of the great Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, whose disciples also
included the avatāras Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and Śrī
Advaita Ācārya. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the Golden Lord
and spiritual preceptor of all the worlds, made Isvara
Purī greatly fortunate by accepting him as dīkṣā guru.

[Nityānanda Prabhu took dīksā from Lakṣmīpati Ṭīrtha and
was actually Mādhavendra Purī’s godbrother but He
accepted Mādhavendra as His śīkṣā guru. Thus, we follow
Bhagavat paramparā, the line of śīkṣā rather than
dīksā.]



mahāprabhu śrī-caitanya, rādhā-kṛṣṇa nahe anya,

rūpānuga janera jīvana

viśvambhara priyaṅkara, śrī-svarūpa dāmodara,

śrī-gosvāmī rūpa-sanātana (6)

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
combined, is the very life of the rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas who
follow Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī,
Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmīs were the dearmost
servants of Viśvambhara (Śrī Caitanya).



rūpa-priya mahājana, jīva, raghunātha hana,

tÃra priya kavi kṛṣṇadāsa

kṛṣṇadāsa-priya-bara, narottama sevā-para,

jÃra pada viśvanātha-āśa (7)

Dear to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī were the great saintly
personalities, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, whose intimate disciple was the great poet Śrī
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja. The dearmost of Kṛṣṇadāsa was Śrīla
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, who was always engaged in guru
sevā. His lotus feet were the only hope and aspiration
of Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.



viśvanātha-bhakta-sātha, baladeva jagannātha,

tÃra priya śrī-bhaktivinoda


                              30
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

mahā-bhāgavata-bara, śrī-gaurakiśora-bara

hari-bhajanete jÃra moda (8)

Prominent among the associates of Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura was Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa. After
him the line descended to Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja, who was the beloved śikṣā guru of Śrī
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. Bhaktivinoda was the intimate
friend of the great mahābhāgavata Śrīla Gaura Kiśora
dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, whose sole delight was hari
bhajana.



śri vārṣabhānavī-barā, sadā sevya-sevā-parā

tÃhāra dayita-dāsa-nāma

prabhupāda-antaraṅga, śrī svarūpa-rūpanuga,

śrī keśava bhakati-prajñāna

gauḍīya-vedānta-vettā, māyāvāda-tamohantā,

gaura-vāṇī-pracārācāra-dhāma (9)

The most distinguished Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura, whose initiated name was Śrī Vārṣabhānavī
Dayita dāsa, was always engaged in divine service to
Hari, Guru, Vaisnava. An internal and intimate disciple
of Prabhupāda following in the line of Svarūpa Damodara
and Rūpa Gosvāmī was Śrī Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī.

Having full knowledge of Vedānta philosophy according to
the Gauḍīya sampradāya, Śrila Keśava Mahāraja
annihilated the darkness of all māyāvāda arguments. He
has served Navadvīpa Dhāma so much, and his life is an
example for both practicing and preaching Mahāprabhu’s
message.



tÃra pradhān pracārako, śrī bhaktivedānta nāmo

patita-janete doyā-dhāma

His foremost disciple-preacher was Śrī Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Prabhupāda, who has spread the message of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu throughout the world and is thus a
reservoir of mercy and compassion for all fallen souls.



keśava priya mahājana vāmana nārāyaṇa haña

gaura-vāṇī tādera prāṇa-dhana

Most dear to Śrī Keśava Gosvāmī were the saintly
personalities Śrī Vāmana Gosvāmī and Śrī Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī, whose life and soul are the teachings of
Mahāprabhu.



                              31
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


or: tÃra śisya aganana, tÃra madhye preṣṭha hana śrī
bhakti-prajñāna keśava

tÃra śisya aganana, tÃra madhye anyatama śrī
bhaktivedānta nārāyaṇa (9)

or: Out of Prabhupāda’s countless disciples, Śrī Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī was his dearmost. And out of the
countless disciples of Śrī Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī, one of the most prominent is Śrī Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.



ei saba harijana, gaurāṅgera nija-jana

tÃdera ucchiṣṭe mora kāma (10)

It is my desire to honor the remnants (ucchiṣṭa) – their
mahāprasāda and their instructions – from the lotus
mouths of all these personal associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.




Śrī Gurvāṣṭakam (Sanskrit)


Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura



saṁsāra-davānala-līḍha-loka-

trāṇāya kāruṇya-ghanāghanatvam

prāptasya kalyāṇa-guṇārṇavasya

vande guroḥ śrī caraṇāravindam (1)

Just as a raincloud extinguishes a blazing forest fire
by showering its rain upon it, Śrī Gurudeva, by his rain
of divine mercy, delivers the people burning in the fire
of material existence, suffering the three-fold miseries
—adhyātmika, adhibhautika, adhidaivika. I offer prayers
unto the lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva, who manifests when
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy becomes very thick and who is an ocean of
auspicious qualities.



mahāprabhoḥ kīrtana-nṛtya-gīta-

vāditra-mādyan-manaso rasena

romañca-kampaśru-taraṅga-bhājo

vande guroḥ śrī caraṇāravindam (2)

Śrī Gurudeva is inspired by Mahāprabhu’s saṅkīrtana and
is always dancing, singing, and playing musical

                             32
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

instruments. Because he is tasting Mahāprabhu’s prema-
rasa in his heart, like a madman he sometimes exhibits
ecstatic symptoms—his hairs stand on end, he shivers,
and waves of tears flow from his eyes. I offer prayers
unto Śrī Gurudeva’s lotus feet.



śrī-vigrahārādhana-nitya-nānā-

śṛṅgāra-tan-mandira-mārjanādau

yuktasya bhaktāṁś ca niyuñjato’pi

vande guroḥ śrī caraṇāravindam (3)

Always worshiping Śrī Vigraha and absorbed in śṛṅgāra-
rasa, Śrī Gurudeva daily dresses Them differently with
beautiful clothes and ornaments designed to enhance
Their meetings. He cleans the temple and performs other
services for Them. He also engages his disciples in
these services. I offer prayers unto the lotus feet of
Śrī Gurudeva.



catur-vidha-śrī-bhagavat-prasāda-

svādv-anna-tṛptān hari-bhakta-saṅghān

kṛtvaiva tṛptiṁ bhajataḥ sadaiva

vande guroḥ śrī caraṇāravindam (4)

Śrī Gurudeva is always satisfied to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
devotees relishing four kinds of foodstuffs that have
been offered, namely, those which are chewed, sucked,
licked, and drunk. Thus the devotees become satisfied by
tasting mahāprasāda. (That is, by accepting prasāda in
the mood of service, material life is destroyed and the
bliss of divine love is awakened in the heart.) I offer
prayers unto the lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva.



śrī-rādhikā-mādhavayor apāra-

mādhurya-līlā-guṇa-rūpa-nāmnām

prati-kṣaṇāsvādana-lolupasya

vande guroḥ śrī caraṇāravindam (5)

At every moment Śrī Gurudeva is experiencing intense
greed in his heart to taste the unlimited sweetness of
the holy names, forms, qualities, and pastimes of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava in Vṛndāvana. I offer my prayers unto
the lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva.



nikuñja-yūno rati-keli-siddhyai

yā yālibhir yuktir apekṣanīyā

                           33
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


tatrāti-dākṣyād ati-vallabhasya

vande guroḥ śrī caraṇāravindam (6)

Śrī Gurudeva is always present with the sakhīs, planning
the arrangements for the perfection of yugala-kiśora’s
amorous pastimes (rati-keli) within the kuñjas of
Vṛndāvana. Because he is so expert in making these
tasteful arrangements for Their pleasure, he is very
dear to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I offer prayers unto the
lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva.



sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair

uktas tathā bhāvyata eva sadbhiḥ

kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya

vande guroḥ śrī caraṇāravindam (7)

All the scriptures proclaim Śrī Gurudeva is sākṣāt hari,
the direct potency of Śrī Hari, and is thus considered
by saintly authorities to be His non-different
representative. Because Śrī Gurudeva is so dear to the
Lord, being His confidential servitor (acintya-
bhedābheda-prakāśa-vigraha, the inconceivable different
and non-different worshipable manifestation of the
Lord), I offer prayers unto his lotus feet.



yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo

yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto’pi

dhyāyaṁ stuvaṁs tasya yaśas tri-sandhyaṁ

vande guroḥ śrī caranāravindam (8)

Only by the mercy of Śrī Gurudeva can one receive the
mercy of Kṛṣṇa; without his grace the living entities
cannot make any advancement nor be delivered. Meditating
three times a day on the glories of Śrī Gurudeva and
reciting stava-stuti, I offer prayers unto his lotus
feet.



śrīmad-guror-aṣṭakam etad uccair

brāhme muhūrte paṭhati prayatnāt

yas tena vṛndāvana-nātha-sākṣāt-

sevaiva labhyā januṣo’nta eva (9)

That person who very attentively recites this aṣṭakam to
Śrī Gurudeva during brāhma muhūrta is sure to achieve
direct service to the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the very
life and soul of Vṛndāvana (vṛndāvana-nātha), upon
attaining his vastu-siddhi or pure spiritual form.

                           34
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




Śrī Gurvāṣṭakam (Bengali version)


Śrīmad Bhaktiviveka Bhāratī Gosvāmī Mahārāja



dāvānala-sama saṁsāra dahane, dagdha jīva kula-uddhāra
kāraṇe,

karuṇā-vārida kṛpāvāri-dāne, vandi sei gurur caraṇa-
kamala (1)



nṛtya-gīta vādya-śrī hari kīrttane, rahena magana
mahāmatta mane,

romāñca kampāśru hoya gaura preme, vandi sei gurur
caraṇa-kamala (2)



sadā rata jini vīgraha-sevane, śṛṅgārā di āro mandira-
mārjjane,

korena niyukta anugata jane‚ vandi sei gurur caraṇa-
kamala (3)



carvvya-cuṣya-lehja-peya-rasamoya, prasādānna kṛṣṇer ati
svāḍu hoya,

bhakta-āsvāḍane nija tṛpta roya, vandi sei gurur caraṇa-
kamala (4)



śrī rādhā-mādhava-nāma-rūpa-guṇe, ananta mādhurjya-līlā-
āsvādane

lubdha citta jini hana pratikkṣane, vandi sei gurur
caraṇa-kamala (5)



vraja juva dvandva-rati-sanvarddhane, jukti kore sakhī
gane vṛndāvane

ati dakkśa tāhe, priyatama-gane, vandi sei gurur caraṇa-
kamala (6)



sarvva śāstra gāya śrī harir svarūpa, bhakta-gana bhāve
sei anurūpa

kintu jini prabhu-priyatama-rūpa, vandi sei gurur

                           35
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

caraṇa-kamala (7)



jāhāra prasāde kṛṣṇa kṛpā pāi jāra aprasāde anya gati
nai,

tri-sandhyā kīrttira stava dhyāne bhāi, vandi sei gurur
caraṇa-kamala (8)



gurudevāṣṭaka ati jatna kori’, brāhma-muhūrtte paṛe ucca
kori’

vṛndāvana-nātha sākkṣāt śrī hari, sevā pāya sei vasttu
siddhi-kāle (9)

Translation same as for Guruvāṣṭakam by Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura




Gurudeva, Boḍo Kṛpa Kori’

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



gurudeva, boḍo kṛpa kori’, gauḍa-vana mājhe, godrume
diyācho sthāna

ājñā dilo more, ei braje bosi’, hari-nāma koro gāna (1)

Gurudeva, very mercifully you have given me a placein
Godruma in the forests of Gauḍa, ordering me to dwell in
this Vraja and chant hari-nāma.



kintu kabe prabhu, yogyatā arpibe, e dāsere doyā kori’

citta sthira habe, sakala sohibo, ekānte bhojibo hari
(2)

But when, O my master, will you mercifully give this
servantthe qualification to fulfill your order? Then
with my mind peaceful, I will tolerate all difficulties
and serve Śrī Hari with single-pointed focus.



śaiṣava-yauvane, jaḍa-sukha-saṅge, abhyāsa hoilo manda

nija-karma-doṣe, e deho hoilo, bhajanera pratibandha (3)

Indulging in mundane pleasures in my childhood and
youth, I cultivated many bad habits. Due to reactions to
these sinful acts, my body itself has become an obstacle
to doing bhajana.



                             36
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


vārdhakye ekhona, pañca-roge hata, kemone bhojibo bolo’

kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā, tomāra caraṇe, poḍiyāchi suvihvala (4)

Now, in old age I am afflicted with illnesses of the
five senses. Tell me how I can do bhajana . Bitterly
weeping and perturbered, I have fallen at your lotus
feet.




Gurudeva! Kṛpā-Bindu Diyā

—Gurudeva! Give Me A Drop of Mercy!—

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



gurudeva!

kṛpā-bindu diyā koro ei dāse

tṛṇāpekṣā ati hīna

sakala sahane bala diyā koro

nija mane spṛhā-hīna (1)

Gurudeva! Give me a drop of mercy—make this servant more
humble than a blade of grass. Give me the strength to
tolerate all eventualities. Let me not hanker for my own
honor and fame.



sakale sammāna korite śakati

deho nātha! jathājatha

tabe to’ gaibo harināma sukhe

aparādha habe hata (2)

Give me the power, O master, to honor all living
entities according to what they are due (and all
Vaiṣṇavas as befitting their platform). Then I will be
able to chant the holy names blissfully, and all my
offenses will be vanquished!



kabe heno kṛpā labhiyā e jana

kṛtārtha hoibe nātha!

śakti-buddhi-hīna āmi ati dīna

koro more ātma-sātha (3)

O my master! When will I be benedicted with your mercy

                             37
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

and finally be successful in my life? I am so fallen
that I have no strength or intelligence. Kindly take my
soul and make me your own.



jogyatā-vicāre kichu nāhi pāi

tomāra karuṇā sāra

karuṇā nā hoile kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā

prāṇā nā rākhibo āra (4)

Examining myself, I find no good qualities; Your mercy
is the essence of my existence. If you are not merciful,
then bitterly weeping I will no longer maintain my life.




Śrī Guru-Caraṇa-Padma

—The Lotus Feet of Śrī Guru—

Prema-bhakti-candrikā, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



śri guru-caraṇa-padma, kevala bhakati-sadma,

vando mui sāvadhāna mate

jāhāra prasāde bhai, e bhava toriyā jāi,

kṛṣṇa-prāpti hoya jāhā ha’te (1)

The lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva are the treasure-house of
unalloyed prema-bhakti for Kṛṣṇa. I very carefully
worship and serve those lotus feet. By his mercy, O
brother, we can cross over material existence and attain
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



guru-mukha-padma-vākya, cittete koriyā aikya,

āra nā koriho mane āśā

śrī guru-caraṇe rati, ei se uttamā gati,

je prasāde pūre sarva āśā (2)

Embrace within your heart the words emanating from Śrī
Gurudeva’s lotus mouth, desiring nothing else.
Attachment for his lotus feet brings one to the highest
goal. By his grace all desires for spiritual perfection
are fulfilled.



cakṣu-dāna dilā jei, janme janme prabhu sei


                           38
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

divya-jñāna hṛde prakāśito

prema-bhakti jāhā hoite, avidyā vināśa jāte,

vede gāya jāhāra carito (3)

He who gives me the gift of transcendental vision and
enlightens my heart with divine knowledge is my master
birth after birth. From him emanates prema-bhakti,
divine loving devotion, by which ignorance is destroyed.
The Vedic scriptures sing of his character.



śrī guru karuṇā-sindhu, adhama janāra bandhu,

lokanātha lokera jīvana

hā hā prabhu koro doyā, deha more pada-chāyā,

tuwā pade lainu śaraṇa

(ebe jaśa ghuṣuka tribhuvana) (4)

Śrī Gurudeva is the ocean of mercy, the friend of the
degraded, the life and soul of everyone! O master, be
merciful! Alas, O Gurudeva, give me the shade of your
lotus feet—at your feet I have surrendered. (Now your
fame shall be spread all over the three worlds.)




Jaya Jaya Śrī Guru, Prema-Kalpa-Taru

Vaiṣṇava dāsa



jaya jaya śrī guru, prema-kalpa-taru

adbhuta yāṅko parakāśa

hiyā ageyāna, timira-vara jñāna

sucandra kiraṇe karu nāśa (1)

All glories, all glories to Śrī Guru, the desire tree of
prema. His manifestation is most astonishing – with
shining moonbeams of knowledge, he removes the vast
darkness in the heart.



iho locana ānanda-dhāma

ajācita mo-hena, patita heri yo pahuṅ

yāce deyala harināma (2)

His eyes are the abode of bliss. Seeing me so fallen, he
earnestly entreated me to take harināma.


                              39
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



durmati agati, satata asate mati

nāhi sukṛti lava leśa

śrī vṛndāvana, yugala-bhajana-dhana

tāhe korolo upadeśa (3)

I live a wicked and misdirected life, my mind constantly
absorbed in illusion. I have not even a speck of sukṛti.
Despite all this, still he is instructing me about the
treasure of the bhajana of the Divine Couple in Śrī
Vṛndāvana.



niramala gaura, prema-rasa siṅcane

pūralo jagajana āśa

so caranāmbuje, rati nāhi hoyala

royata vaiṣṇava-dāsa (4)

Śrī Guru is nourishing the whole world with the spotless
nectar of gaura-prema, thus fulfilling everyone’s hopes.
But I have still not developed rati for his lotus feet,
therefore this Vaiṣṇava-dāsa is weeping.




Gurudeva! Kabe Mora Sei Dina Ha’be

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śaraṇāgati



gurudeva! kabe mora sei dina ha’be?

mana sthira kori’, nirjjane bosiyā, kṛṣṇa-nāma gā’bo
yabe

saṁsāra-phukāra, kāṇe nā paśibe, deha-roga dūre ra’be
(1)

O Gurudeva, when will that day come when, steadying my
mind and sitting in a solitary place, I will sing Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s names? Mundane topics will not enter my ears,
and diseases will remain far away.



‘hare kṛṣṇa’ boli’, gāhite gāhite, nayane bahibe lora

dehete pulaka, udita hoibe, premete koribe bhora (2)

Chanting hare kṛṣṇa, profuse tears will flow from my
eyes. My bodily hairs will rise up in rapture as I
become overwhelmed with prema.


                           40
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



gada-gada vāṇī, mukhe bāhiribe, kÃpibe śarīra mama

gharmma muhurmuhuḥ, vivarna hoibe, stambhita pralaya
sama (3)

Choked words will come from my mouth. My body will
tremble, endlessly perspire and turn pale. Being
devastated by all this, I will left completely stunned.



niṣkapaṭe hena, daśā kabe ha’be, nirantara nāma gā’bo

āveśe rohiyā, deha-jātrā kori’, tomāra karunā pā’bo (4)

When will I attain such a pure condition that with a
simple heart I will sing the holy names non-stop? Fully
absorbed in rapture, I will perform bodily maintenance
unaware. Thus, I will receive your mercy.




Gurudeva! Kabe Tava Karunā Prakāśe

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śaraṇāgati



gurudeva! kabe tava karunā-prakāśe

śrī-gaurāṅga-līlā, hoya nitya-tattva, ei dṛḍha viśvāse

‘hari hari’ boli’, godruma-kānane, bhramibo darśana-āśe
(1)

O Gurudeva, when will you manifest your mercy which will
instill in me firm faith in the eternal truth of Śrī
Gauraṅga’s līlās. Chanting “Hari, Hari!” I will wander
throughout the Godruma forest hoping to catch a vision
of these pastimes.



nitāi, gaurāṅga, advaita, śrīvāsa, gadādhara–pañca-jana

kṛṣṇa-nāma-rase, bhāsā’be jagat, kori’ mahā-saṅkīrttana
(2)

The five personalities – Nitāi, Gaurāṅga, Advaita,
Śrīvāsa and Gadādhara – are performing mahā-saṅkīrtana,
flooding the entire universe with the nectar of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s name.



narttana-vilāsa, mṛdaṅga-vādana, śunibo āpana-kāṇe

dekhiyā dekhiyā, se līlā-mādhurī, bhāsibo premera bāne
(3)


                           41
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

I will hear the sounds of dancing and the rhythm of
mṛdaṅgas with my own ears. Constantly looking upon the
sweetness of these pastimes, I will drift in the flood
of prema.



nā dekhi’ ābāra, se līlā-ratana, kāṅdi ‘hā gaurāṅga’
boli’

āmāre viṣayī, pāgala boliyā, aṅgete dibeka dhūli (4)

Then, losing my vision of this jewel-like pastime, I
will cry out, “Hā Gauraṅga!” Proclaiming me to be a
madman, the materialists will throw dust at me.




Śrī Guru Mahimā


Śrī Sanātana dāsa



āśraya koriya vando śrī guru-caraṇa

jaha hoite mile bhai kṛṣṇa premadhana (1)

Taking the shelter of Śrī Guru I glorify his lotus feet.
O brother, this will bring one the wealth of kṛṣṇa-
prema.



jīvera nistara lāgi nanda-suta hari

bhuvane prakāśa pāna guru-rūpa dhori (2)

To deliver the jīvas the son of Nanda Mahārāja, Śrī
Hari, has manifested in this world as Śrī Guru.



mahimāya ‘guru’ ‘kṛṣṇa’ eka kori jāna

guru ājñā hṛde saba satya kori māna (3)

Know that Guru’s and Kṛṣṇa’s glories are the same.
Accept the order of Guru in your heart as all-in-all,
knowing it to be the ultimate truth.



satya jñāne guru vakye jahāro viṣvāsa

avaṣya tāhāra hoya braja-bhūme vāsa (4)

One who has full faith in the truth of Guru’s words will
surely take up residence in Braja-bhūmi.



                           42
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


jā’ra prati gurudeva hona parasanna

kona vighne sei nāhi hoya avasanna (5)

One who has pleased Śrī Guru is not affected by any
obstacle.



kṛṣṇa ruṣṭa ho’le guru rākhibāre pāre

guru ruṣṭa ho’le kṛṣṇa rakhibāre nāre (6)

If Kṛṣṇa is displeased, Guru can protect you. But if
Guru is displeased, even Kṛṣṇa cannot help you.



guru-mātā, guru-pitā, guru hoya pati

guru bina e saṁsāre nāhi āro gati (7)

Guru is mother, father and protector. In this world
there is no shelter except Śrī Guru.



guruke ‘manuṣya’ jñāna nā koro kakhono

guru-nindā kabhu karne nā koro śravaṇa (8)

Never think that Guru is an ordinary person. Never let
any criticism of Guru enter your ear.



guru-nindukero mukha kabhu nā heribe

jathā hoya guru-ninda, tathā nā jāive (9)

Do not look at the face of someone who criticizes Śrī
Guru and never go where Guru is censured.

guru vikriyā yadi dekhoho kakhono

tathāpi avajñā nāhi koro kadācana (10)

If you see Guru perform some unusual behavior, still
never disrepect him.



guru pāda padme rahe jāra niṣṭhā bhakti

jagat tārite sei dhare mahāśakti (11)

One whose bhakti is fixed at the lotus feet of Guru has
the great power to deliver the whole world.



heno guru pāda padma karoho vandanā


                           43
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

jāhā hoite ghuce bhai sakala yantraṇā (12)

Worship the lotus feet of such a Guru, O brother, and
all miseries will end.



gurupāda-padma nitya je kore vandana

śire dhari vandi āmi tāñhāra caraṇa (13)

I glorify and keep on my head the feet of one who always
worships Gurupāda-padma.



śrī guru caraṇa padma hṛde kori āśa

śrī guru vandana kore sanātana dāsa (14)

Praying to attain Śrī Guru’s lotus feet in his heart,
Sanātana dāsa glorifies him.




Śrī Vaiṣṇava-Vandanā

Śrī Devakīnandana dāsa Ṭhākura



vṛndāvana-vāsī jata vaiṣṇavera gaṇa

prathame vandanā kori sabāra caraṇa (1)

First of all I offer glorifications to the feet of all
of the Vaiṣṇavas of Vṛndāvana.



nīlācala-vāsī jata mahāprabhura gaṇa

bhūmite paḍiyā vandoṅ sabāra caraṇa (2)

Praising of all of Mahāprabhu’s Nīlācala associates, I
prostrate at their feet.



navadvīpa-vāsī jata mahāprabhura bhakta

sabāra caraṇa vandoṅ hoiyā anurakta (3)

I pray for loving attachment to the lotus feet of all of
Mahāprabhu’s Navadvīpa bhaktas.



mahāprabhura bhakta jata gauḍa-deśe sthiti

sabāra caraṇa vandoṅ koriyā praṇati (4)


                           44
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

I offer praṇāmas at the feet of all of Mahaprabhu’s
Gauḍadeśa (Bengal) devotees.



je-deśe je-deśe baise gaurāṅgera gaṇa

ūrddhva-bāhu kori vandoṅ sabāra caraṇa (5)

With upraised arms I pray to the feet of all of
Gaurāṇga’s bhaktas, in whichever country they may
reside.



hoiyāchena hoibena prabhura jata dāsa

sabāra caraṇa vandoṅ dante kori’ ghāsa (6)

Holding a straw between my teeth, I submit at the feet
of all the servants of Mahāprabhu that were or will be.



brahmaṇḍa tārite śakti dhare jane jane

e veda purāṇe guṇa gāya jebā śune (7)

I have heard their glorification in the Vedas and
Purāṇas, which proclaim that each one of His devotees
has the śakti to deliver an entire universe.



mahāprabhura gaṇa saba patita pāvana,

tāi lobhe mui pāpī loinu śaraṇa (8)

(Hearing of their glory) I have come with great
eagerness to surrender to Mahāprabhu’s bhaktas, who are
all patita pāvana for sinners like me.



vandanā korite mui kata śakti dhari

tamo-buddhi-dośe mui dambha mātra kori (9)

What power do I have to glorify them? But out of my
ignorance and unmitigating pride I do so anyway,
thinking myself so qualified.



tathāpi mūkera bhāgya manera ullāsa

doṣa kṣami’ mo-adhame koro nija dāsa (10)

Even though I am dumb and unable to express their
greatness, still my heart is joyful due to my great good
fortune (that the Vaiṣṇavas have accepted me as their
own and Śrī Gurudeva has given me harināma full of
blissful pastimes). Forgive the faults of this fallen
soul and make me your servant.

                           45
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




sarva-vāñchā siddhi haya yama-bandha chuṭe

jagate durlabha hoiyā prema-dhana luṭe (11)

They award the perfection of all desires, including
freedom from death, and even that rarest treasure not
found in this world—prema!



manera vāsanā pūrṇa acirāte hoya

devakīnandana dāsa ei lobhe koya (12)

All of one’s pure, heartfelt desires will be fulfilled
without delay. Devakīnandana dāsa, intensely eager for
this, glorifies and prays to the Vaiṣṇavas.




Ohe! Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura

Śaraṇāgati, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



ohe! vaiṣṇava ṭhākura, doyāra sāgara,

e dāse koruṇā kori’

diyā pada-chāyā, śodho he āmāre,

tomāra caraṇa dhori (1)

O worshipable Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura! Ocean of kindness! Be
merciful to this servant. I am catching hold of your
lotus feet—give me their shade and purify me.



chaya vega domi’, chaya doṣa śodhi’,

chaya guṇa deho dāse

chaya sat-saṅga, deho’ he āmāre,

bosechi saṅgera āśe (2)

Help me subdue the six urges¹ and cleanse me of six
faults,² please bestow upon me the six qualities of a
devotee,³ and offer me the six kinds of devotional
association.4 I am sitting in your association, hoping
to receive this.



ekākī āmāra, nāhi pāya bala,

harināma-saṅkīrtane

                           46
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


tumi kṛpā kori’, śraddhā-bindu diyā,

deho’ kṛṣṇa-nāma-dhane (3)

Alone, I do not have the strength to perform my
harināma-saṅkīrtana. Please be kind and give me one drop
of faith. Please bestow upon me the priceless treasure
of kṛṣṇa-nāma!



kṛṣṇa se tomāra, kṛṣṇa dite pāro,

tomāra śakati āche

āmi to’ kāṅgāla, ‘kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa’ boli’,

dhāi tava pāche pāche (4)

Kṛṣṇa is yours! You have the power to give Kṛṣṇa! I am
nothing more than a beggar running behind you, calling
out “Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!”

1) chaya vega—the six urges: vācaḥ—speech; manasaḥ—
mind; krodha—anger; jihvā—tongue; udara— stomach; and
upastha—genitals;

2) chaya doṣa—six faults that spoil one’s bhajana:
atyāhāra—over-eating or over-collecting; prayāsaḥ—over-
endeavor; prajalpa—idle gossip; niyama-āgraha—following
rules and regulations mechanically with too much
attachment; niyama-agraha—overly neglecting rules and
regulations; asat-jana-saṅga—associating with worldly-
minded persons; laulyam—ardent mundane greed;

3) chaya guṇa—six qualities that enhance one’s bhajana:
utsāhā—enthusiasm; niścayāt—firm faith; dhairya—patience
to achieve prema; bhakti-anukūla-pravṛtti—accepting
activities that are favorable for bhajana; asat-saṅga-
tyāga—giving up mundane association; bhakti-sadācāra—
good behavior for devotion;

4) chaya sat-saṅga—six true ways of association with
devotees: dāna—giving charity to devotees; pratrigraha—
accepting gifts in return; bhajana-kathā-śravana-ālapa,
hearing and discussing topics on bhajana; mahāprasāda
bhakṣaṇa—honoring mahāprasāda; bhojana dāna—giving
prasāda.




Ei-Bāro Koruṇā Koro


Prārthanā, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



ei-bāro koruṇā koro vaiṣṇava gosāi

patita-pāvana tomā vine keho nāi (1)

                             47
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


Vaiṣṇava Gosāi, please give me your mercy right now! You
are patita-pāvana, purifier of the fallen. There is no
one except you to save us!



kāhāra nikaṭe gele pāpa dūre jāya

emona doyāla prabhu kebā kothā pāya? (2)

All sins go away in your presence. Where could anyone
find a master as kind as you?



gaṅgāra paraśa hoile paścāte pāvana

darśane pavitra koro—ei tomāra guṇa (3)

After touching the Gaṅgā one becomes purified, but your
quality is such that just the sight of you purifies one
of his sins!



hari-sthāne aparādhe tā’re harināma

tomā sthāne aparādhe nahiko eḍāna (4)

Offenses committed at the lotus feet of Śrī Hari are
absolved by harināma. But for offenses against you there
is absolutely no means of deliverance!



tomāra hṛdoye sadā govinda viśrāma

govinda kohena—mama vaiṣṇava parāṇa (5)

Govinda is always resting in your heart. Thus, Govinda
says, “The Vaiṣṇavas are My life and soul!”



prati-janme kori āśā caraṇera dhūli

narottame koro doyā āpanāra boli’ (6)

Narottama dāsa prays, “In every birth I am hoping for
the dust of your lotus feet. Please be compassionate to
me, and call me yours.”




Sakala Vaiṣṇava Gosāi

Śrī Rādhā-Mohana dāsa



sakala vaiṣṇava gosāi doyā koro more

                           48
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


dante tṛṇa dhori’ kahe e dīna pāmare (1)

With a straw between my teeth, this very wretched and
fallen person is petitioning all the Vaiṣṇavas, who are
masters of the senses, “Please give me your mercy.”

śrī guru-caraṇa āro śrī kṛṣṇa-caitanya

pāda-padma pāoyāiyā more koro dhanya (2)

Please make me fortunate by helping me to attain shelter
at the lotus feet of Śrī Guru and Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Caitanya
(and Nityānanda Prabhu).



tomā’ sabāra karuṇā vine ihā prāpti naya

viśeṣe ayogya mui kahilo niścoya (3)

Without receiving the mercy from all of the Vaiṣṇavas, I
will be bereft of shelter at the lotus feet of Śrī Guru
and Gaurāṅga because I know that I am totally
unqualified.



vañchā kalpa-taru hao karuṇā sāgara

ei to’ barasā mui dhariye antara (4)

All the Vaiṣṇavas are vañchā kalpa-taru (wish-fulfilling
trees) and an ocean of mercy. This faith that I nourish
for the Vaiṣṇavas Ihold deep within my heart.



guṇa leśa nāhi more aparādhera sīmā

āmā’ uddhāriyā loke dekhāo mahimā (5)

I have no good qualities and I have committed
uncountable offenses, but if you will deliver me (give
me bhakti), then everyone will come to know of your
glories.



nāma-saṅkīrtane-ruci āro prema-dhana

e rādhā-mohane deho hoiyā sakaruṇa (6)

Being supremely merciful, please bestow taste for nāma-
saṅkīrtana and the wealth of prema upon this Rādhā-
Mohana dāsa.




Ṭhākura Vaiṣṇava-Gaṇa

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura

                           49
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017




ṭhākura vaiṣṇava-gaṇa, kori ei nivedana,

mo boḍo adhama durācāra

dāruṇa-saṁsāra-nidhi, tāhe ḍubāilo vidhi,

keśe dhori’ more koro pāra (1)

O saintly Vaiṣṇavas! Please hear my prayer. I am the
most wretched and fallen soul, drowning in this
formidable material ocean by the will of Providence.
Please help me to cross over this ocean—grab me by the
hair and pull me out.



vidhi boḍo balavān, nā śune dharama-jñān,

sadāi karama-pāśe bāndhe

nā dekhi tāraṇa leśa, jata dekhi saba kleśa,

anātha kātare teñi kānde (2)

The laws of Providence are so powerful that they do not
consider religion or knowledge, rather they bind one
with the ropes of karma. I see no way of escape —I see
only misery. Helpless and grief-stricken, I weep.



kāma, krodha, lobha, moha, mada, abhimāna saha,

āpana āpana sthāne ṭāne

aichana āmāra mana, phire jena andha-jana,

supatha-vipatha nāhi jāne (3)

Lust, anger, greed, bewilderment, madness and pride are
pulling me here and there. Thus my mind is like a blind
man wandering without any sense of discrimination.



nā loinu sat mata, asate majilo cita,

tuwā pāye nā korinu āśa

narottama-dāse koya, dekhi śuni lāge bhaya,

tarāiyā loho nija-pāśa (4)

My mind did not accept the path of truth, rather I was
absorbed in falsehoods. Narottama dāsa says, “I did not
aspire for your lotus feet, O venerable Vaiṣṇava,
fearing what I've seen and heard, I beg you to keep me
near you and save me.”




                             50
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017



Ṭhākura Vaiṣṇava-Pada

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



ṭhākura vaiṣṇava-pada, avanīra su-sampada,

suno bhāī hoyā eka mana

āśraya loiyā bhaje, tāre kṛṣṇa nāhi tyaje,

āro saba more akāraṇa (1)

The lotus feet of the saintly Vaiṣṇavas are the greatest
wealth in this world. O my dear brothers! Please listen
attentively. Kṛṣṇa never forsakes one who takes shelter
of the Vaiṣṇavas and who worships Him. Others die
without reason.



vaiṣṇava-caraṇa-jala, prema-bhakti dite bala,

āro keho nahe balavanta

vaiṣṇava-caraṇa-reṇu, mastake bhūṣaṇa binu,

āro nāhi bhūṣaṇera aṅta (2)

The water that has washed the feet of a Vaiṣṇava gives
strength to attain prema-bhakti. Nothing is more
powerful than this. The dust of the feet of the
Vaiṣṇavas upon my head is the only decoration needed at
the time of death.



tīrtha-jala-pavitra-guṇe, likhiyāche purāṇe,

se saba bhaktira pravañcana

vaiṣṇavera pādodaka, sama nahe ei saba,

jāte hoya vāñcchita pūraṇa (3)

The purifying qualities of the water of the holy places
are mentioned in the Purāṇas, but according to the
tenets of bhakti, the water from the feet of a Vaiṣṇava
is much more potent than water from all the holy places.
This water fulfilled all one’s desires.



vaiṣṇava-saṅgete mana, ānandita anukṣana,

sadā hoya kṛṣṇa-para-saṅga

dīna narottama kānde, hiyā dhairya nāhi bāndhe,

more daśā keno hoilo bhaṅga (4)


                              51
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

By associating with the Vaiṣṇavas who are always
discussing topics of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one feels ever
increasingly blissful. The lowly Narottama dāsa cries
out, “Oh, my heart is breaking—I have lost the
association of Kṛṣṇa’s intimate bhaktas.”




Bimala Vaiṣṇava

Kalyāṇa Kalpa-Taru, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



hari hari kabe mora ha’be heno dina,

bimala vaiṣṇave, rati upajibe, bāsanā hoibe kṣīṇa (1)

O Hari! O Mahāprabhu! When will the fortunate day come
when rati, deep love and attachment, will come in my
heart for the lotus feet of the pure-hearted Vaiṣṇavas?
(At that time I will honor and serve them,) and thus all
my material desires (and anarthas, especially lust and
anger,) will fade away.



antara-bāhire, sama vyavahāra, amānī mānada ha’bo

krṣṇa-saṅkīrtane, śrī-kṛṣṇa-smaraṇe, satata majiyā ra’bo
(2)

(With a heart free from duplicity) my outer behavior
will correspond to my inner feelings and thoughts.
(Seeing myself as completely insignificant) I will give
all respect to others, seeking no honor in return.
Always dancing and singing the holy names, I will remain
constantly absorbed in remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful
pastimes.



e dehera kriyā, abhyāse koribo, jīvana jāpana lāgi’

śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhajane, anukūla jāhā, tāhe ha’bo anurāgī (3)

My bodily maintenance should simply go on by habit so
that my life can be fully given to harināma. I will
become attached only to that which is favorable for
serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



bhajanera jāhā, pratikūla tāhā, dṛḍha-bhāve teyāgibo

bhajite bhajite, samaya āsile, e deho chāḍiyā dibo (4)

I will firmly reject whatever is disruptive to the
sacred worship. Continuing to do bhajana, in time I will
give up this body (happily and peacefully).



                           52
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


bhakativinoda, ei āśā kori’, bosiyā godruma-bane

prabhu-kṛpā lāgi’, vyākula antare, sadā kāṅde saṅgopane
(5)

Residing alone in the forest of Godruma and continuously
weeping (“because I cannot control my mind”),
Bhaktivinoda anxiously prays, “I am living only with the
hope that Mahāprabhu will bestow His mercy on me.”




Kṛpā Koro Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura

Kalyāṇa Kalpa-Taru, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



kṛpā koro vaiṣṇava ṭhākura,

sambandha jāniyā, bhajite bhajite, abhimāna hau dūra (1)

O Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura! Please give me your mercy—knowledge
of my relationship with Bhagavān and the ability to do
bhajana, casting arrogance far away.



‘āmi to vaiṣṇava’, e buddhi hoile, amānī nā ho’bo āmi

pratiṣthāśā āsi’, hṛdoya dūṣibe, hoibo niraya-gāmī (2)

If I think “I am a Vaiṣṇava,” then I will never become
humble. My heart will become contaminated with the hope
of receiving honor from others, and I will surely go to
hell.



tomāra kiṅkora, āpane jānibo, ‘guru’-abhimāna tyaji’

tomāra ucchiṣṭha, pada-jala-reṇu, sadā niṣkapaṭe bhaji
(3)

Give me the mercy that I can renounce the false
conception of my being guru and can be your servant. Let
me sincerely honor your remnants and your foot-dust and
foot-bath water.



‘nije śreṣṭha’ jāni, ucchiṣṭthādi dāne, ho’be abhimāna
bhāra

tāi śiṣya taba, thākiyā sarvadā, nā loibo pūjā kā’r (4)

By thinking myself very advanced and giving my remnants
to others, I will be burdened with the weight of false
pride. Let me always identify as your disciple and not
accept worship or praise from others.


                              53
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017



amānī mānada, hoile kīrtane, adhikāra dibe tumi

tomāra caraṇe, niṣkapaṭe āmi, kāṅdiyā luṭibo bhūmi (5)

If I can renounce the desire for honor for myself and
can offer respect to others, you will bless me with the
ability to perform kīrtana purely. Weeping and rolling
on the ground, I sincerely submit myself at your lotus
feet.




Kabe Śrī Caitanya More

Kalyāṇa Kalpa-Taru, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



kabe śrī caitanya more karibena doyā

kabe āmi paibo vaiṣṇava-pada-chāyā (1)

Oh, when will Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu bestow His mercy
upon me so that I will be able to obtain the shelter of
the lotus feet of the Vaiṣṇavas?



kabe āmi chāḍibo e viśayābhimāna

kabe viṣṇu-jane āmi koribo sammāna (2)

When will I renounce my enjoying spirit and then be able
to properly honor the Vaiṣṇavas?



gala-vastra kṛtāṅjali vaiṣṇava-nikaṭe

dante tṛṇa kori’ dāṅḍāibo niṣkapaṭe (3)

In a very humble, submissive mood and without duplicity,
I will stand before the Vaiṣṇavas with cloth around my
neck, folded hands, and a straw in my teeth.



kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā janāibo duḥkha-grāma

saṁsāra-anala hoite māgibo viśrāma (4)

Bitterly weeping, I will relay the multitude of my
miseries and beg for relief from the blazing fire of
material existence.



śuniyā āmāra duḥkha vaiṣṇava ṭhākura

āmā lāgi’ kṛṣṇe āvedibena pracura (5)

                           54
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


When the venerable Vaiṣṇavas hear of my sufferings, they
will petition the Lord profusely on my behalf.



vaiṣṇavera āvedane kṛṣṇa doyāmoya

e heno pāmara prati ha’bena sadoya (6)

In response to the Vaiṣṇavas' prayers, the tender-
hearted Kṛṣṇa will then display His compassion towards
this wicked person.



vinodera nivedana vaiṣṇava-caraṇe

kṛpā kori’ saṅge laha ei akiñcane (7)

Bhaktivinoda prays to the lotus feet of the Vaiṣṇavas,
“O Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura! Please be merciful and take this
destitute person into your fold.”




Yaṅ Kali Rūpa

Mādhava dāsa



yaṅ kali rūpa śarīra nā dharata?

taṅ vraja-prema-mahānidhi-kuṭharika, kaun kapāṭa
ughāḍata (1)

If Rūpa Gosvāmī had not appeared in Kali-yuga, who would
have opened the great store-house of vraja-prema (the
sentiments in the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhikā – Her madhu
sneha) and distributed its contents freely?



nīra kṣīra haṁsana, pāna-vidhāyana, kaun pṛthak kari
pāyata

ko sab tyaji bhaji vṛndāvana, ko sab grantha viracita
(2)

Just as a swan separates milk from water, who could have
separated the rasas to taste them? Abandoning
everything, he performed bhajana in Vṛndāvana and wrote
his rasika literatures.



jab pitu vana-phula, phalata nānā-vidha, manorāji
aravinda

so madhukar vinu, pāna kaun jānata, vidyamāna kari
bandha (3)

                           55
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


When the yellow forest flowers blossom and fruits ripen,
he lived like a bee taking the nectar from lotuses—who
could have understood the nectar he was collecting?



ko jānata, mathurā-vṛndāvana, ko jānata vraja-nīta

ko jānata rādhā-mādhava rati, ko jānata soi prīta (4)

Who could have understood Kṛṣṇa’s līlās in Mathurā and
Vrṇdāvana? How could we have known the sweet vraja-līlas
(especially the moods of the gopīs) and the love between
Rādhā-Mādhava?



jākara caraṇe, prasāde sakala jana, gāi gavāi sukha
pāvata

caraṇa-kamale, śaraṇāgata mādho, tab mahimā ura lāgata
(5)

By the mercy of his lotus feet, all can sing about and
attain such divine bliss. The surrendered Mādhava dāsa
is always praying to embrace Rūpa’s glories.




Śrī Rūpānugatya-Māhātmya—Śuniyāchi Sādhu-Mukhe

The Glories of the Rūpānugas

Śrila Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



śuniyāchi sādhu-mukhe bole sarva-jana

śrī rūpa-kṛpāya mile yugala-caraṇa (1)

I have heard it told from the lips of sādhus - they all
say - by Śrī Rūpa’s mercy one can attain Śrī Yugala’s
lotus feet.



hā! hā! prabhu sanātana gaura-paribāra

sabe mili’ vāñchā-pūrṇa koroho āmāra (2)

Oh, Sanātana Prabhu! O personal associates of Gaurāṅga!
All of you together, please satisfy all my heart’s
desires.



śrī rūpera kṛpā jena āmā prati haya

se pada āśraya jāra, sei mahāśaya (3)


                           56
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Let the mercy of Śrī Rūpa be upon me. Whoever takes
shelter of his lotus feet is mahāśaya, a great
personality.

.

prabhu lokanātha kabe saṅge loiyā jābe

śrī rūpera pāda-padme more samarpibe (4)

When will my holy master Lokanātha Svāmī [who is master
of the whole world] take me with him and offer me at the
lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī?



heno ki hoibe mora—narma-sakhī-gaṇe

anugata narottame koribe śāsane (5)

Will it ever happen to me that Rādhā’s dearmost narma
sakhīs will give direct instructions to Narottama and
accept him as their faithful follower?




Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmīra Uddeśye Racita Gītā
Boliyā Pracalita

The Song on the Life Goal of Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī

Śrīla Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja



kothāya go premamayi rādhe rādhe

rādhe, rādhe go, jaya rādhe, rādhe (1)

Where is She who is full of prema? All glories to Śrī
Rādhā.



dekhā diye prāṇa rākho rādhe rādhe

tomāra kāṅgāla tomāya ḍāke rādhe rādhe (2)

O Rādhā! Please give me Your darśana and save my life.
Your wretched beggar calls out to You, “Rādhe! Rādhe!”



rādhe vṛndāvana-vilāsinī, rādhe rādhe

rādhe kānu-mana-mohinī rādhe rādhe (3)

O Rādhā, You enjoy pleasure pastimes in the forest of
Vṛndāvana wherein You enchant the mind of Kṛṣṇa.



                           57
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


rādhe aṣṭa-sakhīra śiromaṇi, rādhe rādhe

rādhe vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, rādhe rādhe (4)

O Rādhe, You are the crest-jewel among Your eight
principal sakhīs. O Rādhā, daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Bābā.



(gosÃi) niyama kore sadāī ḍāke, rādhe rādhe (5)

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was alway calling out, “Rādhe!
Rādhe!”



(gosÃi) eka-bār ḍāke keśī-ghāṭe

ābār ḍāke vaṁśī-vaṭe rādhe rādhe (6)

. . . sometimes at Keśī Ghāṭa, sometimes at Vaṁśī Vaṭa.



(gosÃi) eka-bār ḍāke nidhu-vane

ābār ḍāke kuñja-vane rādhe rādhe (7)

. . . sometimes in Nidhuvan, sometimes in Sevā Kuñja.



(gosāi) eka-bār ḍāke rādhā-kuṇḍe

ābār ḍāke śyāma-kuṇḍe rādhe rādhe (8)

. . . sometimes at Rādhā Kuṇḍa, sometimes at Śyāma
Kuṇḍa.



(gosāi) eka-bār ḍāke kusuma-vane

ābār ḍāke govardhane rādhe rādhe (9)

. . . sometimes at Kusuma Sarovara, sometimes at
Girirāja Govardhana.



(gosÃi) eka-bār ḍāke tāla-vane

ābār ḍāke tamāla-vane rādhe rādhe (10)

. . . sometimes at Tālavan, sometimes at Tamālvan.



(gosÃi) malina vasana diye gāya,

vrajera dhūlāya gaḍāgaḍi jaya rādhe rādhe (11)

Raghunātha dāsa wears simple cloth which appears to be

                           58
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

dirty because he is always rolling on the earth crying
out, «Rādhe! Rādhe!»



(gosÃi) mukhe rādhā rādhā bole,

bhāse nayanera jale, rādhe rādhe (12)

Calling out “Rādhe! Rādhe,” his eyes are bursting with a
flood of tears.



(gosÃi) vṛndāvane kuli kuli kende veḍāya

rādhā boli, rādhe rādhe (13)

He wanders throughout the lanes of Vṛndāvana crying out,
“Rādhe! Rādhe!”



(gosÃi) chāpanna daṇḍa rātri-dine

jāne nā rādhā-govinda vine, rādhe rādhe (14)

He knows nothing but Rādhā-Govinda throughout the day
and night (56 daṇḍas: 1 daṇḍa=24 minutes). Rādhe! Rādhe!



tār par cāri daṇḍa śuti thāke

svapne rādhā-govinda dekhe, rādhe rādhe (15)

He takes rest for only 4 daṇḍas (1 hr. 36 min.). At that
time in his dreams he receives darśana of Rādhā-Govinda.
Rādhe! Rādhe!




Akrodha Paramānanda


Locana dāsa Ṭhākura



akrodha paramānanda nityānanda rāya

abhimāna śūnya nitāi nagare beḍāya (1)

The noble Nityānanda Prabhu is never angry, for He is
the personification of supreme transcendental bliss.
Devoid of all false ego, Nitāi wanders about the town.
[Baladeva Prabhu and Lakṣmaṇa get angry, but not
Nityānanda.]



adhama patita jīvera dvāre dvāre giyā

                           59
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


hari-nāma mahā-mantra dicchena bilāiyā (2)

Going from door to door to the houses of the most fallen
and wretched souls, He freely distributes the gift of
the harināma mahā-mantra.



jāre dekhe tāre kohe dante tṛṇa dhori’

āmāre kiniyā loho bolo gaurahari (3)

Holding a straw in His teeth, He exclaims to whomever He
sees, “Please purchase Me by worshiping Gaurahari!”



eto boli’ nityānanda bhūme gaḍi jāya

sonāra parvata jeno dhūlāte loṭāya (4)

Saying thus, Nityānanda Prabhu rolls about on the
ground, appearing like a golden mountain tumbling in the
dust.



heno avatāre jār rati nā janmilo

locana bole sei pāpī elo āra gelo (5)

Locana dāsa says, “That sinful person whose love for
such an avatāra as this has not yet awakened simply
comes and goes uselessly in the cycle of repeated birth
and death.”




Śrī Nityānanda-Niṣṭhā—Nitāi-Pada-Kamala

—Firm Faith in Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu—

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



nitāi-pada-kamala, koṭi-candra-suśītala

je chāyāya jagat juḍāya

heno nitāi vine bhāi, rādhā-kṛṣṇa pāite nāi,

dṛḍha kori’ dharo nitāiyer pāya (1)

Nitāi’s lotus feet are more cooling than the shining of
millions of moons. Their shade gives solace to the
universe. O brother, without a personality such as
Nitāi, it is not possible to attain Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. So
hold on very tightly to His lotus feet.



                           60
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


se sambandha nāhi jā’ra, vṛthā janma gelo tā’ra,

sei paśu boḍo durācāra

nitāi nā bolilo mukhe, majilo saṁsāra sukhe,

vidyākule ki koribe tāra (2)

If someone does not establish his relationship with
Nityānanda Prabhu, his life is wasted. Such a wicked
person is no better than an animal. Not taking the name
of Nitāi on one’s lips, he loses himself in the so-
called happiness of this world. Then what is the value
of one’s education and birth in a high family or great
nation?



ahaṅkāre matta hoiyā, nitāi-pada pāsariyā,

asatyere satya kori’ māni

nitāiyera koruṇā habe, vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa pābe,

dharo nitāiyera caraṇa du’khāni (3)

Forgetting Nitāi’s lotus feet, one becomes maddened by
the false concept of bodily life and considers the
illusory energy as real. If Nitāi is merciful, one can
attain Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Vraja, so firmly catch
hold of His lotus feet .



nitāiyera caraṇa satya, tāhāra sevaka nitya,

nitāi-pada sadā koro āśa

narottama boḍo duḥkhī, nitāi more koro sukhī,

rākho rāṅgā-caraṇera pāśa (4)

The feet of Nitāi are real and His servants are eternal.
Always hope and pray for the lotus feet of Nitāi.
“Narottama is very unhappy! O Nitāi, please make me
happy. Keep me tucked close to the reddish lotuses of
Your feet.”




Nitāi Guṇa Maṇi

Locana dāsa Ṭhākura



nitāi guṇa-maṇi āmār nitāi guṇa-maṇi

āniyā premera vanyā bhāsāilo avanī (1)

My Nitāi—the jewel of all virtues, the jewel of all

                            61
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

virtues—my Nitāi has brought the flood of divine love
which is flooding the whole world.



premera vanyā loiyā nitāi āilā gauḍa-deśe

ḍubilo bhakata-gaṇa dīna hīna bhāse (2)

Nitāi brought this overwhelming deluge of prema to
Bengal, preaching Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s message. The
devotees drowned in the ecstasy of the flood, while the
wretched and fallen were swept along with the current.



dīna hīna patita pāmara nāhi bāche

brahmāra durlabha prema sabākāre jāce (3)

Without discriminating, Nityānanda Prabhu freely offered
this rare prema to all, even to the fallen and wretched
who did not desire it [no one could avoid it!], although
it is difficult to attain even for Lord Brahmā.



ābaddha koruṇā-sindhu kāṭiyā muhān

ghare ghare bule prema-amiyār bān (4)

The ocean of mercy had formerly been sealed tight, but
Nitāi broke the dam, allowing the flood of nectarean
prema to surge from house to house (sweetly requesting
all to take harināma).

locana bole mora nitāi jebā na bhajilo

jāniyā śuniyā sei ātma-ghātī hoilo (5)

Locana dāsa says, “Whoever has not worshiped my Nitāi
(or who has heard yet does not follow Nitāi’s
instructions), knowingly commits suicide.”




Boḍo Sukher Khabor Gāi


Vaiṣṇava Siddhānta Mālā - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



boḍo sukher khabor gāi

surabhi-kuñjete nāmer hāṭ khuleche khoda nitāi (1)

I am singing news of the greatest happiness! At Surabhi-
kuñja in Śrī Navadvīpa, Nityānanda Prabhu has opened the
Marketplace of the Holy Name.



                           62
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


boḍo mojār kathā tāy

śraddhā-mūlye śuddha-nāma sei hāṭete bikāy (2)

Such wonderful things are going on in that blissful
marketplace! Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu is selling the pure
Holy Name wholesale, merely for the price of one’s
faith.



jata bhakta-vṛnda vasi’

adhikārī dekhe’ nāma becche daro kasi’ (3)

Seeing the assembly of devotees eagerly waiting to
purchase the Name, Nityānanda Prabhu first examines each
of them to test their qualification; then He bargains
for the proper price with each one accordingly.



yadi nāma kinbe bhāi

āmār saṅge calo mahājaner kāche jāi (4)

O my dear friends! If you really want to buy this pure
Holy Name, then just come along with me, for I am now
going to meet with this Nityānanda Mahājana.



tumi kinbe kṛṣṇa-nāma

dasturi loibo āmi, pūrṇa ha’be kāma (5)

Thus, you will finally be able to acquire the pure Holy
Name. I will also take my due commission, and in this
way all three of us will fulfill our desires.



boḍo doyāl nityānanda

śraddhā-mātra lo’ye dena parama-ānanda (6)

Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu is so extraordinarily merciful –
accepting only one’s faith in the Holy Name, He bestows
the topmost divine bliss.



ek-bār dekhle cakṣe jal

‘gaura’ bo’le nitāi dena sakala sambal (7)

When Nitāi sees a tear welling in someone’s eye upon
chanting the name of “Gaura” He instantly gives His
support to that person; indeed, He bestows all divine
opulences.




                           63
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

dena śuddha kṛṣṇa-śiksā

jāti, dhana, vidyā, bala nā kore apekṣā (8)

He gives that person genuine realization of the pure
teachings of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as found in Bhagavad-Gītā and
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. While displaying all this
inconceivable mercy, He pays no heed to caste, material
wealth, mundane knowledge or physical ability.



amani chāḍe māyā-jāl

gṛhe thāko, vane thāko, nā thāke jañjāl (9)

Now, dear friends,    please reject all of māyā’s
entangling snares.    If you are a householder, then just
remain at home; if    you are renounced, then just live in
the forest. Either    way, nothing more will trouble you.



ār nāiko kalir bhoy

ācaṇḍāle dena nāma nitāi doyāmoy (10)

We no longer need to fear the terrible Age of Quarrel,
for the most merciful Nitāi gives the Holy Name to any
and everyone – even to the lowest among men.



bhaktivinoda ḍāki’ koy

nitāi-(candra)-cāraṇa vinā ār nāhi āśroy (11)

Bhaktivinoda loudly proclaims to all, “Other than the
lotus feet of Nitāi-Candra, there is no shelter!”




Ānanda Kanda Nitāi-Canda


Rādhā-ballabha dāsa



ānanda kanda, nitāi-canda, aruṇa nayana karuṇa canda

karuṇa-pūra, saghane-jhura, hari hari dhvani bola re (1)

Nitāi-canda is the very root of divine ecstasy. His
eyes, the hue of the crimson sunrise, overflow with
desire to rain compassion. Oh, from the abode of mercy
comes a steady stream of benevolence as He gently
vibrates, “Hari! Hari!”



naṭaka-raṅga, bhakata-saṅga, bibidha-bhāsa rasa-taraṅga

                              64
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


īṣata-hāsa, madhura-bhāsa, saghane gimadola re (2)

Oh, floating in the varicolored waves of rasa He creates
a splendid spectacle as He joyfully dances with His
devotees, gently smiling, speaking sweetly and nodding
His head again and again.



patita kora, japata gaura, dina-rajani ānanda bhora

prema ratana, kariya yatana, jagajjane karu dāna re (3)

He embraces the fallen jīvas with the chanting of gaura-
nāma and Himself day and night is drowning in joy. Oh,
with great endeavor He protected the precious treasure
of prema and gave it to the whole world.



kīrtana-mājha, rasika rāja, jaichan kanayā-giri birāja

braja bihāra, rasa bithara, madhura madhura gāna re (4)

He is the king of rasikas in the center of the kīrtana.
Oh! His presence is as graceful as the golden Mount
Sumeru. Absorbed in the playful pastimes of Vraja, He
spreads rasa everywhere through His sweet, sweet
singing.



dhūli-dhūsara, dharaṇi-upara, kabahuṅ luṭhata preme gara
gara

kabahuṅ calata, kabahuṅ khelata, kabahuṅ aṭṭahāsa re (5)

Melting in prema, sometimes He rolls on the ground,
covering Himself with the ashen-grey dust. Oh! Sometimes
He is restlessly wandering about, sometimes playing
tricks on people and sometimes roaring in laughter.



kabahuṅ sveda, kabahuṅ kheda, kabahuṅ pūlaka, svara-
bibheda

kabahuṅ lampha, kabahuṅ jhampa, kabahuṅ dirgha śvāsa re
(6)

Oh, sometimes perspiring, sometimes lamenting, sometimes
his hairs bristling with bliss, sometimes stammering,
sometimes leaping very far, sometimes jumping high into
the air, sometimes heaving deep sighs.



karunā-sindhu, akhila-bandhu, kali-yuga-tama-pūraṇa indu

jagata-locana, paṭala-mocana, nitāi purala āśa re (7)

He is the ocean of mercy, the friend of all, and the
full moon dissipating the darkness of ignorance in Kali-

                           65
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Yuga. Casting His glance over the whole world He clears
away the curtain of māyā and delivers everyone. Oh! The
fulfillment of all of my hopes and aspirations rest in
Nityānanda Prabhu.



andha-adhama, dīna durajana, premadāne karala mocana

pātola jagata kebala bañcita, e rādhā-ballabha dāsa re
(8)

He has given this prema to the spiritually blind, the
fallen, the destitute and the wicked. Oh! The whole
world has received His gift; only this Rādhā-ballabha
dāsa has been left out.




Bhavārṇave Po’ḍe Mora


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



bhavārṇave po’ḍe mora ākula parāṇa

kise kula pā’bo, tā’ra nā pāi sandhāna (1)

I have fallen into this vast ocean of material
existence, thus my heart is extremely disturbed. I
search for the shore, but have no idea how to reach it.



na āche karama-bala, nāhi jñāna-bala

yāga-yoga-tapo-dharma - nā āche sambala (2)

I have no strength from my previous karma or from all my
knowledge. Nor do I have any help from virtues accrued
by sacrifices, yoga practice or austerities.



nitānta durbala āmi, nā jāni saṅtāra

e vipade ke āmāre koribe uddhāra (3)

I am extremely feeble, and I don’t know how to swim. Who
will rescue me from this dreadful calamity?



viṣaya-kumbhīra tāhe bhīṣaṇa-darśana

kāmera taraṅga sadā kore’ uttejana (4)

I see the horrible alligator of sense gratification
present before me, and the waves of lust are constantly
agitating and provoking me.

                             66
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




prāktana vāyura vega sahite nā pāri

kāṅdiyā asthira mana, nā dekhi kāṇḍārī (5)

I can no longer cope with all the urges that are pushing
me like a raging wind from my previous births. I simply
weep with an agitated mind, for there is no rescuer in
sight.



ogo śrī jāhnavā devī! e dāse karuṇā

koro’ āji nija-guṇe, ghucāo jantraṇā (6)

O most revered Śrī Jāhnavā-devī! Please show mercy to
this servant today by virtue of your own good qualities,
and kindly relieve all my afflictions.



tomāra caraṇa-tarī koriyā āśraya

bhavārṇava pāra ha’bo ko’rechi niścaya (7)

By taking shelter in the boat of Your lotus feet I will
certainly be able to cross over this vast ocean of
material existence.



tumi nityānanda-śakti kṛṣṇa-bhakti-guru

e dāse koroho dāna pada-kalpa-taru (8)

You are the very pleasure potency of Nityānanda Prabhu,
and you are the guru of kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Kindly bestow upon
this servant the wish-fulfilling desire-tree of your
lotus feet.



kota kota pāmarere ko’recho uddhāra

tomāra caraṇe āj e kāṅgāla chāra (9)

Thus, this most wretched and shameful rogue prays at
Your lotus feet today, for he sees that You are
delivering many other sinners.




Jaya Jaya Nityānanda Rohiṇī-Kumāra

Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura



jaya jaya nityānanda rohiṇī-kumāra

                           67
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


patita uddhāra lāgi du’bāhu pasāra (1)

All glories to Nityanānda Prabhu, the son of Rohiṇī. He
holds out His arms, delivering the fallen.



gada gada madhura madhura ādho bola

jare dekhe tā’re preme dhari deya kola (2)

With a choked voice He stammers sweetly. Whomever He
sees He lovingly embraces.



dagamaga locana ghuraye nirantara

sonara kamala jena jiraye bhramara (3)

Intoxicated with prema His eyes always roll restlessly,
looking like a bumblebee buzzing around a golden lotus.



dayāro ṭhākura nitāi para duḥkha jāne

hari-nāmera mālā gāthi ’dilo jaya jane (4)

Knowing the sufferings of others, the merciful Nitāi
Ṭhākura strung a garland of the Holy Names and bestowed
it upon the people of this world.



pāpi-pāṣandi jata korilo dalana

diṇa-hiṇa jane koilā prema bitarana (5)

He subdued the sinners and the atheists, and distributed
prema to the humble and the lowly.



‘āha re gaurāṅga’ boli pare bumitale

śarīra bijilo nitāiyera nayanera jale (6)

Calling out, “Alas! O Gaurāṅga,” He falls to the earth,
His whole body drenched from the torrents of tears
flowing from His eyes.



vṛndāvana-dāsa mane ei bicārilo

dharani upare kibā sumeru paḍilo (7)

In his heart Vṛndāvana-dāsa considers Nityanānda Prabhu
to be like Mount Sumeru falling on the earth.




                           68
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



Śrī Gaura-Rūpa-Guṇa-Varnana

Śrīla Govinda dāsa Kavirāja



jaya nanda-nandana, gopī-jana-ballabha,

rādhā-nāyaka nāgara śyāma

so śacī-nandana, nadīyā-purandara,

sura-muni-gaṇa-manomohana dhāma (1)

All glories to the son of Nanda Mahārāja, beloved of the
gopīs, the hero of Rādhā, Her gallant Śyāma. He has
appeared as the son of Śacī, the monarch of Nadīyā. His
beautiful shape, Kṛṣṇa-rūpa or Śacīnandana-rūpa, is the
abode of all beauty, and enchants all the sages and
godly persons.



jaya nija kāntā, kānti kalevara,

jaya jaya preyasī-bhāva-vinoda

jaya vraja-sahacarī locana-maṅgala,

jaya nadīyā-vāsī nayana-āmoda (2)

All glories to He who has adorned Himself with His
beloved Rādhā’s kānti and manifested His Gaura-rūpa,
always taking pleasure in the moods of His preyasī—
rādhā-bhāva, mahā-bhāva, mādanākya-bhāva. All glories to
He who renders the eyes of the Vraja maidens auspicious.
All glories to He who now delights the eyes of the
residents of Nadīyā.



jaya jaya śrīdāma, sudāmā subalārjuna,

prema-vardhana nava-ghana-rūpa

jaya rāmādī sundara, priya sahacara,

jaya jaga-mohana gaura-anupa (3)

All glories to Śrīdāma, Sudāmā, Subala and Arjuna, who
like fresh new rainclouds increase the ocean of prema.
All glories to Ramāi Paṇḍita, Śrīvāsa, and their other
beautiful brothers who are all intimate devotees of
Mahāprabhu and are dancing, chanting and rolling down on
the earth in great love.All glories to the incomparable
Gaura who captivates the entire universe.



jaya atibala-rāma-priyānuja,

jaya jaya nityānanda-ānanda

                              69
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017


jaya jaya sajjana-gaṇa-bhaya-bhañjana,

govinda dāsa āśa anubandha (4)

All glories to the powerful Balarāma’s dear younger
brother! All glories to Baladeva who is Nityānanda
Prabhu, the bestower of eternal bliss. All glories! All
glories to these Two who eradicate all fear for the
devotees. Govinda dāsa’s hopes and aspirations rest in
Their mercy.




Dhana Mora Nityānanda


Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



dhana mora nityānanda, pati mora gauracandra,

prāṇa mora yugala-kiśora

adwaita ācārya bala, gadādhara mora kula,

narahari vilasai mora (1)

My treasure is Nityānanda Prabhu, my master is Śrī
Gauracandra, and my very life-force is the youthful
Divine Couple of Vraja. My strength is Advaita Ācārya,
my family is Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and Narahari Sarakāra is
my pleasure.



vaiṣṇavera pada-dhūli, tāhe mora snāna-keli,

tarpaṇ mora vaiṣṇavera nāma

vicāra koriyā mane, bhakti-rasa āswādane,

madhyastha śrī-bhāgavat-purāṇa (2)

I enjoy taking bath in the foot dust of the Vaiṣṇavas,
and I become satiated by chanting the names of the
Vaiṣṇavas. I have concluded that to relish the nectar of
devotion, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the best medium.



vaiṣṇavera ucchiṣṭa, tāhe mora mano-niṣṭha,

vaiṣṇavera nāmete ullāsa

vṛndāvane cavutārā, tāhe mora mano-gherā,

kohe dīna narottama-dāsa (3)

My mind is fixed on obtaining the devotees’ food
remnants, and I blossom with joy at the remembrance of

                              70
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

the Vaiṣṇavas’ names. My mind dwells in the courtyard of
Vṛndāvana. Thus speaks the lowly Narottama dāsa.




Hā Hā Morā Gaura-Kiśora

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



hā hā morā gaura-kiśora

kabe doyā kori’, śrī-godruma-vane, dekhā dibe mana-cora
(1)

Oh, my most youthful Gaura-Kiśora! When will You be
merciful and show Yourself to me, and steal away my mind
within the forest of Godruma?



ānanda-sukhada-kuñjera bhitore, gadādhare bāme kori’

kāñcana-varaṇa, cāṅcara cikura, naṭana suveṣa dhori’ (2)

In Ānanda-sukhada-kuñja You stand with Śrī Gadādhara on
Your left, radiating the effulgence of pure gold. You
are adorned with beautiful curly hair and are
wonderfully dressed as a dramatic actor.

dekhite dekhite, śrī rādhā-mādhava, rūpete koribe ālā

sakhī-gaṇa-saṅge, koribe naṭana, galete mohana-mālā (3)

In an instant Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava will appear and
brilliantly illuminate the entire scene. Accompanied by
all Their confidential sakhīs, They will dance with
enchanting flower garlands around Their necks.



anaṅga mañjarī, sadoya hoiyā, e dāsī-karete dhori’

duhe nivedibe, dohara mādhurī, heribo nayana bhori’ (4)

The merciful Anaṅga Mañjarī, catching this maidservant
by the hands, will take me and lovingly offer me unto
the Divine Couple. My eyes will be brimming with
pleasure to behold Their beauty and sweetness.




Gaurāṅga Bolite Habe


—Upon Saying "Gaurāṅga"—

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhakura


                             71
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



‘gaurāṅga’ bolite habe pulaka śarīra

‘hari hari’ bolite nayane ba’be nīra (1)

When will that time come that my body will shiver in joy
upon singing the name “Gaurāṅga?” When will tears flow
from my eyes as I chant “Hari Hari?”



āra kabe nitāi-cāṅdera koruṇā hoibe

saṁsāra-vāsanā mora kabe tuccha habe (2)

And when will the moon-like Nityānanda Prabhu bestow His
mercy on me, and my material desires will reduce to
insignificance?



viṣaya chāḍiyā kabe śuddha habe mana

kabe hāma herabo śrī vṛṇdāvana (3)

When will I renounce material enjoyment and my mind will
become purified? When will I see the cin-maya svarūpa of
Śrī Vṛndāvana?



rūpa-raghunātha-pade hoibe ākuti

kabe hāma bujhabo se yugala-pīriti (4)

When will I eagerly follow the path of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
and Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī? By their instructions I
will be able to understand the loving affairs of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.



rūpa-raghunātha-pade rahu mora āśa

prārthanā koroye sadā narottama dāsa (5)

Let all my hopes rest at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa and
Śrī Raghunātha dāsa. This is Narottama dāsa’s constant
prayer.




Emona Gaurāṅga Vinā Nāhi Āra


Śrīla Premānanda dāsa Ṭhākura



emona gaurāṅga vinā nāhi āra


                           72
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

heno avatāra, ha’be ki ho’yeche,

heno prema-paracāra (1)

There is no one like Gaurāṅga! No other incarnation
past, present or future preached such a rare form of
prema. (He never considered any offense. Therfore, He is
even more merciful than Kṛṣṇa.)



durmati ati, patita pāṣaṇḍī,

prāṇe nā mārilo kā’re

harināma diyā, hṛdoya śodhila,

jāci giyā ghare-ghare (2)

He did not slay the very wicked or the fallen atheists.
Instead, He purified everyone’s heart by going from door
to door, freely giving out the holy names.



bhava-viriñcira, vāñchita je prema

jagate phelilo ḍhāli

kāṅgāle pāiyā, khāilo nāciyā,

bājāiyā karatāli (3)

Even Brahmā and Śaṅkara hankered for that divine love
which Gaurāṅga is pouring over the whole world. When the
miserable and wretched people receive this prema, they
begin to dance and clap their hands with joy.



hāsiyā kāṅdiyā, preme gaḍāgaḍi,

pulake vyāpilo aṅga

caṇḍāle-brāhmaṇe, kore kolā kuli,

kabe vā chilo e raṅga (4)

Laughing and weeping, they roll on the ground in love as
their hairs rise up in rapture. Even the caṇḍālas (dog-
eaters) and brāhmaṇas embrace one another. When has such
a wondrous spectacle ever been seen before?



ḍākiyā-hÃkiyā, khola-karatāle,

gāiyā-dhāiyā phire

dekhiyā śamana, tarāsa pāiyā,

kapāṭa hānilo dvāre (5)

Playing loudly on mṛdaṅga and karatālas, Śrī Gaurāṅga

                            73
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

and His party roamed everywhere, chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names.
Seeing the saṅkīrtana party, Yamarāja (the lord of
death) fell afraid and closed his door.



e tina bhuvana, ānande bhorilo,

uṭhilo maṅgala śora

kohe premānanda, emona gaurāṅge,

rati nā janmilo mora (6)

The three worlds are filled with bliss by the auspicious
uproar of the kīrtana. Premānanda dāsa laments bitterly,
“Oh, that Gaurāṅga is so merciful, yet rati for Him has
not appeared in my heart.”




(Yadi) Gaurāṅga Nahito


Śrī Narahari dāsa



(yadi) gaurāṅga nahito, tabe ki hoito

kemone dharito de

rādhāra mahimā, prema-rasa-sīmā

jagate jānāto ke (1)

If Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu had not   appeared, then what
would have become of us? How would   we have survived? Who
In this world would have ever come   to know Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī's greatness, love at its   highest?



madhura vṛndā, vipina-mādhurī

praveśa cāturī sār

baraja-yuvati, bhāvera bhakati

śakati hoito kār (2)

If Gaurāṅga had not come, who could have had the
intelligence to join the sweet madhura rasa of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s līlās in Vṛndāvana? Who else could have
given the power to enter the vraja-ramaṇīs’ loving mood
of sevā to yugala-kiśora?



gāo punaḥ punaḥ, gaurāṅgera guṇa

sarala hoiyā mana

                           74
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


e bhava-sāgare, emona doyāla

nā dekhi ye eka-jana (3)

With a simple heart sing over and over again of Śrī
Gaurāṅga’s glorious qualities! No one has ever seen such
a compassionate person as He in the entire ocean of
material existence.



gaurāṅga boliyā, nā genu galiyā

kemone dhorinu de

narahari hiyā, pāṣāna diyā

kemone gaḍiyāche (4)

Even though I chant Gaurāṅga’s name, qualities and
pastimes, somehow my heart has not melted – how does
this body continue to survive? How is it that the body
of Narahari has been created with a stone in place of a
heart?




Kaha Nā Gaura Kathā

Śrī Narahari Sarakāra



mana re! kaha nā gaura kathā

gaurera nāma amiyāra dhāma, pirīti mūrati dātā (1)

O mind! Speak only about Gaura. Gaura’s name is the
abode of nectar, and the worshipable bestower of
unnatojjvala-prema.



śayane gaura svapane gaura, gaura nayanera tārā

jīvane gaura maraṇe gaura, gaura galāra hārā (2)

In sleeping – Gaura, in dreaming – Gaura. Gaura is the
star of my eyes. In life – Gaura, at the time of death –
Gaura. Gaura’s name is the precious necklace I wear
around my neck!



hiyāra majhāre gaurāṅga rākhiye, virale vasiyā rabo

manera sādhete se rūpa-caṅdere, nayane nayane thobo (3)

Keeping Gaurāṅga inside my heart, I will sit alone and
fix my mind on His enchanting moon-like form. I will
gaze in His eyes and become absorbed in His beauty.

                             75
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017




gaura vihane na vañchi parāṇe, gaura ko’rechi sāra (4)

gaura boliya jauka jīvane, kichu nā cāhibo āra

Without Gaura I cannot live. Gaura is my everything. I
pray to give up my life taking the name of Gaura – I ask
for nothing else.



gaura gamana, gaura gaṭhana, gaura mukhera hāsi (5)

gaura-pirīti, gaura mūrati, hīyāya raholo paśi

Gaura’s movements, Gaura’s nature, Gaura’s smiling face,
Gaura’s love, Gaura’s full form – all enter my heart.



gaura dharama, gaura karama, gaura vedera sāra

gaura caraṇe, parāṇa sampinu, gaura paribena pāra (6)

Gaura is my dharma, Gaura is the object of my karma,
Gaura is the essence of the Vedas. I surrender my life
at Gaura’s lotus feet. It is Gaura who will take me
across (the ocean of material existence).



gaura śabada gaura sampada, jāhāra hiyāya jāge

narahari dāsa, tÃra dāsera dāsa, caraṇe śaraṇa māge (7)

Gaura is the essential sound vibration and wealth for
that person in whose heart He manifests. Narahari dāsa
always prays to take shelter at the feet of such a
person.




Emona Śacīra Nandana Bine


Śrīla Premānanda dāsa Ṭhākura



emona śacīra nandana bine

‘prema’ bali nāma, ati-adbhuta, śruta hoito kā’ra kāne?
(1)

Aho! Without the mercy of Śrī Gaurasundara, the son of
Śacī, who could have heard about that extraordinarily
wonderful thing called prema?




                            76
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmera, sva-guṇa mahimā, kebā jānāito āro?

vṛndā vipinera, mahā madhurimā, praveśa hoito kā’ro? (2)

Who would have told us the unlimited glories of śrī-
kṛṣṇa-nāma? If Śrī Gaurahari, who is Kṛṣṇa endowed with
the bhāva and color of Śrī Rādhā, had not appeared and
described the unparalleled sweetness of Vṛndāvana, and
if He had not poured His causeless mercy upon the fallen
jīvas of Kali-yuga without discrimination, then who
could have entered into the supreme sweetness of that
Vṛndāvana?



kebā jānāito, rādhāra mādhurya, rasa-jaśa camatkāra?

tā’ra anubhāva, sāttvika vikāra, gocara chilo vā kā’ro?
(3)

Śrī Rādhā is the last limit of that most effulgent
madhura-rasa. Her wonderful mahābhāva consists of
adhirūḍha, modana, mādana, and various other ecstasies.
Without rasika-śekhara Śrī Gaurahari’s mercy, who could
have known all of this? How was it possible for anyone
to know of the divine sāttvika transformations before
Śrī Śacī-nandana Gaurahari revealed them in Jagannātha
Purī at Śri Gambhīrā, within the house of Kāśī Miśra,
while He tasted Śrīmatī Rādhīkā’s moods of separation?



vraje je vilāsa, rāsa mahā-rāsa, prema parakīya tattva

gopīra mahimā, vyabhicārī sīmā, kā’ro avagati chilo eta?
(4)

Without Him who could have understood the loving affairs
in parakīya rasa shared between akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrti
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and mahābhāva-māyī Śrī Rādhā and Her kāya-
vyuha-svarūpā gopīs? Who made it possible to know the
glories of the gopīs, their transcendental bodies and
their various bhāvas—vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika, and
vyabhhicārī?



dhanya kali dhanya, nitāi-caitanya, parama koruṇā kori

vidhi-agocara, je prema-vikāra, prakāśe jagata-bhari (5)

O blessed Kali, you are most glorious, for Śrī Gaurahari
and Nityānanda Prabhu have appeared in this world to
display supreme compassion. They filled the world with
such high levels of prema which were incomprehensible
even to Brahmājī.



uttama adhama, kichu nā bāchilo, yāciyā dileka kola

kahe premānande, emona gaurāṅge, antare dhoriyā dola (6)

Without discriminating as to who is elevated or fallen,

                           77
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

They embraced everyone.

Śrī Premānandajī says, “O brothers! Keep that Śrī
Gaurasundara locked in your heart of hearts.”



Ke Jābi Ke Jābi Bhāi?

—Who Will Go? Who Will Go, Brothers?—

Śrīla Locana dāsa Ṭhākura



ke jābi ke jābi bhāi bhava-sindhu-pāra

dhanya kali-yugera caitanya-avatāra (1)

Who will go? Who will go, O brothers? Who will cross
over this ocean of material suffering? This Kali-yuga in
which Śrī Caitanya-avatāra has appeared is blessed.
[Caitanya-avatāra does not come in every Kali-yuga.]



āmāra gaurāṅgera ghāṭe adāna-kheya vaya

jada, andha, ātura avadhi pāra haya (2)

At the bathing place of my Gaurāṅga, a free ferry-boat
is waiting. There is no restriction—everyone is coming,
including the lame, blind, and distressed. All are
climbing aboard to cross over.



hari-nāmera naukā khāni śrī guru kāṇḍārī

saṅkīrtana kheroyāla du’ bāhu pasāri (3)

Harināma is the boat, Śrī Guru is the helmsman, and the
saṅkīrtana party moving with upraised arms are the oars!



saba jīva hoilo pāra premera bātāse

paḍiyā rohilo locana āpanāra doṣe (4)

All souls can cross over with the favorable winds of
prema. Only Locana dāsa is so unfortunate that, due to
his own fault, he has been left behind.




Hari Bole Modera Gaura Elo

Gītāvalī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura




                             78
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Refrain: hari bole modera gaura elo

elo re gaurāṅga-cānda preme elo thelo

nitāi-advaita-saṅge godrume paśilo (1)

Our Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu came chanting “Hari! Hari!”

Śrī Gauracānda came looking very disheveled as if mad,
due to prema. Along with Nityānanda Prabhu and Advaita
Ācārya, He entered the land of Godruma.



saṅkīrtana-rase mete’ nāma bilāilo

nāmera hāṭe ese preme jagat bhāsāilo (2)

Deeply absorbed in saṅkīrtana-rasa, He distributed the
holy name, and having come to the marketplace of the
holy name, He caused the whole universe to swim in
prema.



godruma-bāsīra āj duḥkha dūre gelo

bhakta-vṛnda-saṅge āsi’ hāṭa jāgāilo (3)

Today all the miseries of the residents of Godrumadvīpa
have gone away, for Gaurāṅga, having come here with all
His devotees, caused the marketplace of the holy name to
appear there.



nadīyā bhramite gorā elo nāmer hāṭe

gaura elo hāṭe, saṅge nitāi elo hāṭe (4)

Wandering all over the land of Nadīyā, Gaurasundara
along with Nityānanda came to the marketplace of the
holy name.



nāce mātoyārā nitāi godrumera māṭhe

jagat mātāy nitāi premera mālasāṭe (5)

Maddened with ecstasy, Nityānanda Prabhu danced in the
meadows of Godruma. Due to prema, He moved His powerful
arms like a challenging wrestler and thus overwhelmed
the universe in rapture.



(torā dekhe jā re) advaitādi bhakta-vṛnda nāce ghāṭe
ghāṭe

palāya duranta kali poḍiyā bibhrāṭe (6)

All of you please come and see the Vaiṣṇavas headed by
Advaita Ācārya dancing along the banks of the Ganges,

                           79
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

going from one ghāṭa to the next. At such a sight the
wicked personality Kali realizes he is in great danger
and runs for his life.



ki sukhe bhāsilo jība gorācānder nāṭe

dekhiyā śuniyā pāṣaṇḍīra buka phāṭe (7)

Why did all the jīvas swim in the ocean of happiness?
Because by seeing Gaurasundara’s dancing and hearing His
voice, even the heart of the atheist breaks.




Elo Gaura-Rasa-Nadī


Śrī Locana dāsa Ṭhākura



elo gaura-rasa-nadī kādambinī ho’ye

bhāsailo gauḍa-deśa prema-bṛṣti diye (1)

The river of Gaura-rasa came in a bank of rainclouds
flooding Gauḍa-deśa with a shower of prema.



nityānanda-rāya tāhe māruta sahāya

jāhā nāhi prema-bṛṣti tāhāṅ lo’ye jāya (2)

Nityānanda-rāya helped as the wind blowing the rain of
love where it did not fall.



huṛu-huṛu-śabde āilo śrī advaitacandra

jala-rasadhāra tāhe rāya-rāmānanda (3)

Śrī Advaitacandra came as the thundering sound of those
clouds and Rāya Rāmānanda came as the rain, letting lose
a stream of rasa.



cauṣati mahānta āilo meghe śobhā kori

śrī-rūpa-sanātana tāhe hoilo vijūri (4)

Sixty-four great saints beautified that cloud bank, and
Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana flashed as its lightening.



kṛṣṇadāsa kavirāja rasero bhandārī


                           80
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

jatane rakhilo prema hema kumbha bhari (5)

Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja became the storekeeper of that rasa.
He collected that prema and kept it carefully in a
golden pot.



ebe sei prema lo’ya jagajane dilo

ei dāsa locana-bhagye bindhu nā mililo (6)

They distributed this prema to the whole world, but it
is this Locana dāsa’s fortune that he is unable to
receive even one drop.




Kali-Kukkura

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



kali-kukkura kadana yadi cāo (he!)

kali-yuga pāvana, kali-bhaya-nāśana,

śrī śacī-nandana gāo (he) (1)

O brothers, if you wish to save yourselves from the dog-
like Age of Kali, then sing the name of Śrī Śacī-
nandana, the savior of this age who nullifies the fear
of Kali.



gadādhara-mādana nitā’yera prāṇadhana,

advaitera prapūjita gorā

nimāi viśvambhara śrīnivāsa-īśvara,

bhakata-samūha-cita-corā (2)

Gorā is the delight of Gadādhara Paṇḍita, very life of
Nityānanda Prabhu, and the worshipable lord of Advaita
and Śrīnivāsa Ācāryas. He has many names like Nimāi and
Viśvambhara, and He steals the hearts of His devotees.



nadīyā-śaśadhara māyāpura-īśvara,

nāma-pravartana-sura

gṛhījana-śikṣaka nyāsikula-nāyaka,

mādhava rādhābhāva-pura (3)

He is the moon of Nadīyā and the lord of Māyāpura, who
advented to manifest the holy name. He taught proper

                              81
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

conduct for gṛhastas and is the nāyaka (Hero) of all
sannyāsīs. He is Mādhava, endowed with the bhāva and
kānti of Śrī Rādhā.



sārvabhauma-śodhana gajapati-tāraṇa,

rāmānanda-poṣana vīra

rūpānanda-vardhana sanātana pālana,

hari-dāsa-modana dhīra (4)

He purified Sārvabhauma, rescuing him from the claws of
Māyāvada, and delivered King Pratāparudra. The heroic
Mahāprabhu nurtured the bhakti of Rāyā Rāmānanda,
increased the bliss of Śrī Rūpa, and maintained Śrī
Sanātana. As a sober sannyāsī He delighted Haridāsa
Ṭhākura (by daily giving him darśana).



vraja-rasa-bhāvana duṣtamata-śātana,

kapaṭī-vighātana kāma

śuddha bhakta-pālana śuṣka jñāna-tāḍana,

chala bhakti-dūṣaṇa rāma (5)

He is absorbed in vraja-rasa. As the transcendental
Kāmadeva, He chastises the evil-minded and destroys
deceit. As Rādhā-ramaṇa Rāma, He nourishes His pure
devotees, drives away dry impersonalism, and removes all
imitations of bhakti.




Gaurāṅgera Duṭī-Pada

—The Two Divine Lotus Feet of Śrī Gaurāṅga—

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



gaurāṅgera duṭī-pada, jāra dhana sampada,

se jāne bhakati rasa sāra

gaurāṅgera madhura līlā, jā’ra karṇe praveśilā,

hṛdoya nirmala bhelo tā’ra (1)

That person who accepts the two lotus feet of Śrī
Gaurāṅga as the treasure of all treasures knows the
essence of bhakti-rasa, the divine mellows of devotional
service. And if the sweet pastimes of Gaurāṅga have
actually entered through the threshhold of someone’s
ears, that person is pure in heart.


                             82
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017



je gaurāṅgera nāma loya, tā’ra hoya premodoya,

tāre mui jāi bolihārī

gaurāṅga guṇete jhure, nitya-līlā tā’re sphure,

se jana bhakati adhikārī (2)

Prema will awaken for that person who takes Gaurāṅga’s
holy names. I give my heart and soul to him and exclaim,
“Bolihārī! Excellent! Bravo!” That person who
appreciates Gaurgāṅga’s qualities with tears coming in
his eyes has become qualified for bhakti, and to him Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s nitya-līlā, or eternal aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā,
are manifested.



gaurāṅgera saṅgī gaṇe, nitya-siddha kori māne,

se jāya vrajendra-suta pāśa

śrī gauḍa-maṇḍala bhūmi, jebā jāne cintāmaṇi,

tā’ra hoya vraja-bhūme vāsa (3)

That person who understands that Gaurāṅga’s personal
associates are nitya-siddha, eternally perfected, is
promoted to the transcendental abode of Vrajendra Suta
(the son of Vraja’s chief). One who knows the divine
abode of Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala, Śrī Navadvīpa, to be
transcendental touchstone (cintāmaṇi) is in truth a
resident of Vraja-bhūmi, Śrī Vṛndāvana.



gaura prema rasārṇave, se taraṅge jebā ḍūbe,

se rādhā-mādhava-antaraṅga

gṛhe vā banete thāke, hā gaurāṅga bole ḍāke,

narottama mÃge tā’ra saṅga (4)

Gaura-prema is an ocean of rasa. One who dives deep in
the waves of that ocean becomes a confidential associate
of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava. Whether one lives in his home as a
gṛhastha or in the forest as a renunciate, as long as he
exclaims, “Hā Gaurāṅga!” Narottama dāsa begs for his
saṅga.




Nitāi-Gaura Nāma

Śrī Locana dāsa Ṭhākura



nitāi-gaura nāma, ānandera dhāma, jei jana nāhi loya

                              83
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


tāre jama-rāya, dhare lare jaya, narake dubāya taya (1)

The holy names of Nitāi and Gaura are the abode of all
jubilation. Those who never utter these names are taken
by Yāma Mahārāja and immersed in the hellish planets.



tulasīra hāra, na pare je chara, jamalāye bāsa tāra

tilaka dharaṇa, na kore je jana, bṛthāya janama tāra (2)

The contemptible person who never wears tulasī neckbeads
takes his permanent residence in the abode of Yāma, and
those who never adorn their foreheads with tilaka live
their lives in vain.



nā loya harināma, bidhi tāre bāma, pāmara pāṣaṇḍa-mati

vaiṣṇava-sevana, nā kore je jana, ki ho’be tāhāra gati
(3)

Those who never chant harināma have an unfavorable
destiny. They are sinful, stone-hearted atheists. And
what will be the destination of those who never serve
the Vaiṣṇavas?



guru-mantra sāra, kore ei bāra, brajete hoibe bāsa

tamo-guṇa jābe, sattva-guṇa pābe, hoibe kṛṣṇera dāsa (4)

Place proper value now on the mantras given by Śrī Guru,
and you will come to live in Vraja. The mode of
ignorance will go, goodness will come in the heart, and
one will become the eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa.



ei dāsa locana, bole anukṣana, (nitāi) gaura-guṇa gāna
sukhe

ei rase jāra, rati nā hoilo, cuna kāli tā’ra mukhe (5)

This Locana dāsa instructs everyone to always chant
Gaura-Nitāi’s holy names with joy. Those who have no
affection for gaura-rasa will be publicly defamed—their
faces will be covered with lime and black tar.




Śrī Gaura-Nityānander Doyā—Parama Koruṇa

Śrī Locana dāsa Ṭhākura



parama koruṇa, pãhu dui jana, nitāi gauracandra

                           84
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


saba avatāra, sāra śiromaṇi, kevala ānanda-kanda (1)

The two Lords Nitāi Gauracandra are supremely merciful.
They are the essence and the crown jewels of all
avatāras and the very source of bliss.



bhajo bhajo bhāi, caitanya-nitāi, sudṛḍha biśwāsa kori’

viṣaya chāḍiyā, se rase majiyā, mukhe bolo hari hari (2)

My dear brother, with firm faith just worship Caitanya-
Nitāi. Renouncing all material enjoyment, always engage
your mouth in chanting “Hari, Hari!” and you will drown
in Their bhakti-rasa.



dekho ore bhāi, tri-bhuvane nāi, emona doyāla-dātā

paśu pākhī jhure, pāṣāṇa vidare, śuni’ jāra guṇa-gāthā
(3)

O brother, just see! In all the three worlds there is no
one else as merciful as Them. Hearing Their glories
(especially Their mercy) sung, the animals and birds cry
tears of love, and stones melt.



saṁsāre majiyā, rohili paḍiyā, se pade nahilo āśa

āpana karama, bhuñjāye śamana, kahoye locana-dāsa (4)

Locana dāsa laments, “I am always so absorbed in my
material enjoyment that no desire is coming in my heart
to worship Gaura-Nitāi. That I get no inspiration to do
bhajana is Yamarāja’s punishment for my past sinful
activities.”




Gaurīdāsa-Mandire


Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita



devādi-deva gauracandra gaurīdāsa-mandire

nityānanda-saṅge gaura ambikate bihare (1)

The Lord of lords, Śrī Gauracandra, along with
Nityānanda Prabhu is pleasurably engaged in His pastimes
in Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita’s house in Ambikā Kālanā.




                           85
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


cāru aruṇa guñjā-hāra hṛt-kamale je dhare

viriñci-sevya pāda-padma lakṣmī-sevya sādare (2)

Gaurasundara adorns Himself with a very beautiful, red
guñjā-mālā, which falls over His lotus heart. Brahmā and
Lakṣmī worship His lotus feet with great respect.



tapta-hema aṅga-kānti prātaḥ-aruṇa-ambare

rādhikānurāga prema-bhakti vāñchā je kore (3)

His body shines brilliantly like molten gold, and His
cloth is saffron like the rising sun. He desires that
prema-bhakti like the anurāga of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



śacī-suto gauracandra ānandito antare

pāṣaṇḍa-kaṇḍa nityānanda-saṅge raṅge bihare (4)

The son of Śacī, Gaurasundara, who is so joyful inside,
is roaming about with Nityānanda Prabhu, defeating the
atheists.



nityānanda gauracandra gaurīdāsa-mandire

gaurīdāsa karata āśa sarva jīva uddhāre (5)

Nityānanda and Gaurasundara are both staying in the
house of Gaurīdāsa, who hopes that They will deliver all
jīvas.




Ohe, Premera Ṭhākura Gorā

Śrī Sajjana-Toṣaṇī



ohe, premera ṭhākura gorā

prāṇera jātanā kibā kabo nātha! hoyechi āpana-hārā (1)

O Śrī Gaurasundara, worshipable Lord of prema! O my
Master! What will I tell You of my sorrows and
sufferings? I have forgotten my original identity.



ki āra bolibo, je kājera tare

enechile nātha! jagate āmāre,

eta din pare kahite se-kathā, khede duḥkhe hoi sārā (2)

                            86
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


O my Lord, what more can I say? After enduring long
suffering and being overwhlemed with sorrow, I have
finally come to understand why You brought me to this
world.



tomāra bhajane nā janmilo rati

jaḍa-mohe matta sadā duramati—

viṣayīra kāche theke theke āmi, hoinu viṣayī-pārā (3)

He Prabhu! I’m so unfortunate that I had no attachment
for worshiping You but was always evil-minded and mad
for material enjoyment. Living with sense enjoyers, I
became like them.



ke āmi, keno je esechi ekhāne

se-kathā kakhono nāhi bhāvi mane

kakhono bhogera, kakhono tyāgera, chalanāya mana nāce
(4)

Who am I? Why am I in this world? These questions I
never pondered. Sometimes enjoying, sometimes renouncing
—my mind was dancing in this cheating.



ki gati hoibe kakhono bhāvi nā

hari-bhakatera kācheo jāi nā

hari-vimukhera ku-lakṣaṇa jata, āmātei sab āche (5)

I never considered what would be my outcome. I never
associated with Kṛṣṇa’s devotees, and I exhibited all
bad signs of being opposed to Bhagavān.



śrī guru-kṛpāya bheṅgeche svapana,

bujhechi ekhono tumi āpana

tava nija-jana parama-bāndhava, saṁsāra kārāgāre (6)

Now, by Śrī Guru’s grace my eyes have been opened and my
dream has been smashed. I now understand that I have
only You and that Your beloved devotees are my greatest
friends in the prisonhouse of this material world.



āno nā bhajibo bhakta-pada binu

rātula-caraṇe śaraṇa loinu

uddhāraha nātha! māyā-jāla ha’te, e dāsera keśe dha’re

                             87
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

(7)

Now I worship Your devotees exclusively and will serve
no one else. He Nātha! Now I have taken shelter of Your
divine feet, which are like red lotuses. Pulling me by
the hair, please deliver me from Māyā’s net.



pātakīre tumi kṛpā koro nāki?

jagāi-mādhāi chilo je pātakī

tāhāte jenechi, premera ṭhākura! pātakīreo tār tumi (8)

Do You not bestow Your mercy on the sinners? Were not
Jagāi and Mādhāi also fallen? Yet You gave them Your
mercy. From this I can understand that You are the Lord
of prema and the deliverer of the fallen.



āmi bhakti-hīna, dīna, akiñcana—

aparādhī-śire dāo du’caraṇa,

tomāra abhaya śrī caraṇe cira—śaraṇa loinu āmi (9)

He Prabhu! I am devoid of bhakti, wretched, and
destitute. Place Your feet on the head of this offender.
I take shelter of Your divine feet, the bestowers of
fearlessness.




Śrīman Mahāprabhu Hari-Vāsara Vrata-Pālana

Śrīla Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura



śrī hari-vāsare hari-kīrtana-vidhāna

nṛtya ārambhilā prabhu jagatera prāṇa (1)

On Ekadaśī day Mahaprabhu, who is the life and soul of
all beings, decreed that everyone should gather for
kīrtana. Hearing the sound of His own name, He began to
dance in ecstasy.



punyavanta śrīvāsa-aṅgane śubhārambha

uṭhilo kīrtana-dhvani ‘gopāla’ ‘govinda’ (2)

In Śrīvāsa-aṅgana, Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura’s divine courtyard,
He inaugurated the auspicious reverberations of the
kīrtana in a booming voice: ‘Gopāla! Govinda!’




                           88
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

mṛdaṅga-mandirā bāje śaṅkha-karatāla

saṅkīrtana-saṅge saba hoilo miśāla (3)

In the courtyard the sounds of the mṛdaṅga, small
cymbals, conch, karatālas and beautiful singing all
mixed together.



brahmāṇḍa bhedilo dhvani pūriyā ākāśa

caudikera amaṅgala jāya saba nāśa (4)

The thunderous sound passed through the entire brahmāṇḍa
and filled the whole sky (reaching Svetadvīpa),
destroying everything inauspicious in all the fourteen
worlds.



uṣaḥ-kāla hoite nṛtya kore viśvambhara

yūtha yūtha hoilo jata gayana sundara (5)

From morning Viśvambhara (He who nourishes and maintains
the whole universe by bhakti) started dancing. Many
groups sang charmingly—each group singing a different
melody.



śrīvāsa-paṇḍita loiyā eka sampradāya

mukunda loiyā āra jana-kata gāya (6)

Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita was the guru of one group of kīrtanīyas,
and Mukunda was the lead singer of another.



loiyā govinda ghoṣa āro kata-jana

gauracandra-nṛtya sabe koreno kīrtana (7)

Govinda Ghoṣa was the head of another group. Gauracandra
danced in the middle of the whole kīrtana party.



dhariyā bulena nityānanda mahābalī

alakṣite advaita loyena pada-dhūli (8)

The mighty Nityānanda Prabhu protected Mahāprabhu when
He swooned while dancing as Advaita Ācārya secretly took
His footdust at that time.



gadādhara-ādi jata sajala-nayane

ānande vihvala hoilo prabhura kīrtane (9)


                           89
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Tears came to Gadādhara, Mukunda, Śrīdhāra and others
upon hearing Mahāprabhu’s kīrtana, as the rising of
aṣṭa-sattvika bhāvas overwhelmed their hearts.



jakhon uddaṇḍ nāce prabhu viśvambhara

pṛthivī kampita hoya, sabe pāya ḍara (10)

Viśvambhara danced with so much force that the earth
trembled, causing all the devotees to become afraid.



kokhono vā madhura nācaye viśvambhara

jena dekhi nandera nandana naṭavara (11)

Sometimes Viśvambhara danced so gracefully and sweetly
that He appeared to be naṭavara Nanda-nandana, the best
of dancers.



aparūpa kṛṣṇa-veśa, aparūpa nṛtya

ānande nayana bhori’ dekhe saba bhṛtya (12)

Mahāprabhu’s beauty is unequalled and unsurpassed,
defeating even Kṛṣṇa’s beauty (even Kṛṣṇa has no
mahābhāva). All His followers’ eyes filled with ānanda
seeing His dancing.



nijānande nāce mahāprabhu viśvambhara

caraṇera tāla śuni ati manohara (13)

Mahāprabhu Viśvambhara danced, absorbed in ānanda.
Hearing the rhythm of His dancing feet, the devotees
became spellbound.



bhāva-bhare mālā nāhi rahaye galāya

chiṇḍiyā paḍaye giyā bhakatera pāya (14)

Echoing this ecstatic mood, His garland swung wildly and
unable to stay around His neck, broke open and fell at
the feet of the devotees.



caturddike śrī-hari maṅgala saṅkīrtana

mājhe nāce jagannātha miśrera nandana (15)

The auspicious sounds of śrī harināma saṅkīrtana spread
in every direction while Jagannātha Miśra’s son danced
in the midst of all the devotees.


                           90
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



jā’ra nāmānande śiva-basana nā jāne

jā’ra jaśe nāce śiva, se nāce āpane (16)

Śiva chants the same blissful name and becomes so
absorbed in prema that his cloth falls down. Hearing
Mahāprabhu’s glories, Śiva starts to dance, and Mahā-
prabhu, hearing His own glories, also dances.



jā’ra nāme valmīki hoilā tapodhana

jā’ra nāme ajāmila pāilo mocana (17)

By this same nāma Valmīki achieved the wealth of
austerity—he saw all Rāma līlā. And by this same nāma
all of Ajāmila’s anarthas and aparādhas were pulled out
by the root.



jā’ra nāma śravaṇe saṁsāra-bandha ghuce

heno prabhu avatārī’ kali-yuge nāce (18)

Hearing śrī kṛṣṇa-nāma totally cuts all worldly
attachments. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself came in Kali-yuga as
Mahāprabhu, dancing and advising all to chant kṛṣṇa-
nāma.



jā’ra nāma gāi śuka-nārada beḍāya

sahasra-vadana prabhu jā’ra guṇa gāya (19)

Śukadeva and Nārada also chant this kṛṣṇa-nāma and
distribute it. With thousands of tongues Mahāprabhu
sings the glories of this nāma.



sarva mahā-prāyaścitta je prabhura nāma

se-prabhu nācaye, dekhe jata bhāgyavāna (20)

Taking Mahāprabhu’s name constitutes the highest form of
atonement. Seeing Mahāprabhu dancing, the devotees
became supremely fortunate.



prabhura ānanda dekhi’ bhāgavata-gaṇa

anyonye galā dhori’ karaye krandana (21)

Seeing Mahāprabhu’s bliss, the devotees embraced each
other and wept loudly (as the rays of Mahāprabhu’s
ānanda entered their hearts).



                           91
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017


sabāra aṅgete śobhe śrī candana-mālā

ānande gāyena kṛṣṇa-rase hai’ bholā (22)

All the devotees attended kīrtana and Mahāprabhu
personally decorated their bodies with candana and
garlands. Śrī Gaurasundara and the devotees sang and
tasted kṛṣṇa-rasa with great joy.



jateka vaiṣṇava-sabe kīrtana-āveśe

nā jāne āpana deho, anya jana kise (23)

Absorbed in kīrtana, all the Vaiṣṇava devotees
completely lost sense of their own bodies and everyone
else around them.



“jaya kṛṣṇa-murāri-mukunda-vanamālī”

ahar-niśa gāya sabe hai’ kutūhalī (24)

“Jaya kṛṣṇa, murāri, mukunda, vanamālī.” Day and night
all the devotees sang kīrtana in great happiness.



ahar-niśa bhakta-saṅge nāce viśvambhara

śrānti nāhi kāro, sabe sattva-kalevara (25)

Viśvambhara danced twenty-four hours with His devotees
but never tired, because His body was sattva-kalevara,
fully transcendental.



ei-mata nāce mahāprabhu viśvambhara

niśi avaśeṣa mātra se eka prahara (26)

Daily Mahāprabhu (in full prema) danced in kīrtana the
whole night, and only stopped three hours before
sunrise.



ei-mata ānanda hoya navadvīpa-pure

prema-rase vaikuṇṭhera nāyaka bihare (27)

Daily Mahāprabhu, the Hero who enjoys the prema-rasa of
Vaikuṇṭha (Svetadvīpa), tasted and distributed great
bliss in Navadvīpa.



e sakala puṇya kathā je kore śravaṇa

bhakta-saṅge gauracandre rahu tā’ra mana (28)

                           92
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


Gauracandra and all His associates enter in the hearts
of the devotees who hear this all-auspicious description
with full faith. (Thus their hearts become Śrīvāsa-
aṅgana.)



śrī kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nityānanda-cāṅd jāna

vṛndāvana-dāsa tachu pada-yuge gāna (29)

Vṛndāvana dāsa says, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and the moon-
like Nityānanda Prabhu are my life and soul and I humbly
offer this song at Their lotus feet.”



Gaurāṅga Tumi More Doyā Nā Chāḍiho

Vāsudeva Ghoṣa



gaurāṅga tumi more doyā nā chāḍiho

āpana koriyā rāṅgā caraṇe rākhiho (1)

O Gaurāṅga! Please do not fail to bestow Your mercy upon
me. Make me Your own and keep me close to Your reddish
lotus feet.



tomāra caraṇa lāgi sab teyāginu

śītala caraṇa pāyā śaraṇa loinu (2)

In order to attain Your lotus feet, I have renounced
everything. I have now taken full shelter of Your
cooling lotus feet.



e kule o kule mûi dilu tilāñjali

rākhiho caraṇe more āpanāra boli (3)

Coming in this family or that family—I have left them
all behind. I beg You to keep me close to Your lotus
feet, calling me Your own.



vāsudeva ghoṣe bole caraṇe dhoriyā

kṛpā kori rākho more pada-chāyā diyā (4)

Vāsudeva Ghoṣa exclaims, “I have taken tight hold of
Your lotus feet. Kindly keep me here, always giving me
their soothing shade.”




                           93
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Je Ānilo Prema-Dhana

—Who Brought the Treasure of Divine Love?—

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



je ānilo prema-dhana koruṇā pracura

heno prabhu kothā gelā ācārya ṭhākura (1)

Who, out of His vast compassion, brought Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu with His treasure of divine love to this
world by calling Him with love and affection? Where has
that Advaita Ācārya Ṭhākura gone? [Advaita Ācārya was
shouting so loudly that Nārāyana’s throne was shaking!]



kÃhā mora svarūpa-rūpa kāhā sanātana

kÃhā dāsa raghunātha patita-pāvana (2)

Where are my Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rūpa Gosvāmī? Where is
my Sanātana Gosvāmī? Where is my Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, the savior of the fallen, conditioned souls?



kÃhā mora bhaṭṭa-yuga kÃhā kavirāja

eka-kāle kothā gelā gorā naṭarāja (3)

Where are my Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa and Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmīs? Where is my Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī? Where
has my Gaurāṅga, the king of dancers, gone? Suddenly,
all at once they left! Where have they gone?



pāṣāṇe kuṭibo māthā anale paśibo

gaurāṅga guṇera nidhi kothā gele pābo (4)

I shall dash my head upon a stone or enter into fire!
Oh, where shall I find such a great treasure-house of
wonderful qualities as Gaurāṅga? Where has He gone?



se saba saṅgīra saṅge je koilo vilāsa

se saṅga nā pāiyā kāṅde narottama dāsa (5)

All of them shared extremely beautiful, sweet pastimes
with each other. Bereft of their association, Narottama
dāsa weeps.




Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu Doyā Koro More

                           94
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya prabhu doyā koro more

tomā vinā ke doyālu jagat-saṁsāre (1)

O Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu, please be kind to me. In
the entire material universe who is more merciful than
You ?



patita-pāvana-hetu tava avatāra

mo-sama patita prabhu nā pāibe āra (2)

You have descended as this āvatāra to deliver the fallen
souls. O Lord, I assure You that You will not find
another more fallen than me!



hā hā prabhu nityānanda premānanda-sukhī

kṛpāvalokana koro āmi boḍo dukhī (3)

Alas! Nityānanda Prabhu, You are always joyful in
ecstatic love (premānanda)! Cast Your merciful glance on
me for I am so full of sorrow.



doyā koro sītā-pati advaita gosāi

taba kṛpā-bale pāi caitanya-nitāi (4)

O Advaita Gosāi, husband of Sītā, be kind to me. By the
power of Your mercy, surely Caitanya-Nitāi will also
give me Their mercy!



hā hā svarūpa, sanātana, rūpa, raghunātha

bhaṭṭa-juga, śrī jīva, hā prabhu lokanātha (5)

Alas! Svarūpa Dāmodara, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī,
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī! O Prabhu
Lokanātha!



doyā koro śrī ācārya prabhu śrīnivāsa

rāmacandra-saṅga mÃge narottama dāsa (6)

Be merciful, O Prabhu Śrīnivāsa Ācārya! Narottama dāsa
begs for the company of Rāmacandra!



                           95
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


doyā koro prabhupāda śrī dayita dāsa

vaiṣṇavera kṛpā mÃge e adhama dāsa (7)

Be merciful, O Prabhupāda, most beloved servant of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā! This fallen servant begs for the
kindness of the Vaiṣṇavas.



doyā koro gurudeva patita-pāvana

śrī caraṇe sevā mÃge e patita jana (8)

O Gurudeva, savior of the fallen, be merciful. This
fallen person is begging for service to your lotus feet.




Jaya Jaya Nityānandādvaita Gaurāṅga



jaya jaya nityānandādvaita gaurāṅga

nitāi gaurāṅga jaya, jaya nitāi gaurāṅga (1)

All glories, all glories to Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī
Advaitacandra Prabhu and Śrī Gaurāṇga Mahāprabhu. May
Nitāi and Gaurāṇga always be victorious.



(jaya) yaśodā-nandana śacī-suta gauracandra

(jaya) rohiṇī-nandana balarāma nityānanda (2)

All glories to the son of Yaśodā, who has come as
Gauracandra, the beloved son of Mother Śacī. All glories
to the dearmost son of Rohiṇī-devī, Śri Balarāma, who is
non-different from Nityānanda Prabhu.



(jaya) mahā-viṣṇur avatāra śrī advaitacandra

(jaya) gadādhara, śrīvāsādi gaura-bhakta-vṛnda (3)

All glories to Śrī Advaitacandra, the incarnation of
Mahā-Viṣnu. All glories to Śrī Gadādhara Pandita, Śrīvās
Ṭhākura and the multitude of Śrī Gaurasundara's devotees
.



(jaya) svarūpa, rūpa, sanātana, rāya rāmānanda

(jaya) khaṇḍa-vāsī, narahari, murāri, mukunda (4)

All glories to Svarūpa Damodara, Rūpa Gosvami, Sanātana
Gosvami and Rāya Rāmānanda. All glories to the residents

                           96
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

of Khaṇda, Narahari, Murāri and Mukunda.



(jaya) pañca-putra saṅge nāce rāya bhavānanda

(jaya) tina putra saṅge nāce sena-śivānanda (5)

All glories to Rāya Bhavānanda, who dances ecstatically
along with his five sons. All glories to Śivānanda Sena,
who is also engaged in Mahāprabhu’s transcendental dance
along with his three sons.



(jaya) dvādaśa gopāla āra cauṣaṭṭi mahānta

(tomarā) kṛpā kori’ deha gaura-caraṇāravinda (6)

All glories to the twelve Gopālas (Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd
friends) and the 64 Mahāntas. All of you are
Mahaprabhu’s dear associates. Please be merciful towards
me and bestow upon me the treasure of Gaurasundara’s
lotus feet.




Bhaja Re Āmāra Mana


Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



bhaja re bhaja re āmāra mana ati manda

bhajana vinā gati nāi re

(bhaja) vraja-vane rādhā-kṛṣṇa-caraṇāravinda

jñāna-karma parihari’ re

(bhaja) vraja-vane rādhā-kṛṣṇa (1)

O my foolish mind, worship the lotus feet of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
in the forests of Vraja. Without this, there can be no
spiritual advancement. Give up all speculative knowledge
and materialistic activities.



(bhaja) gaura-gadādharādvaita guru-nityānanda

gaura-kṛṣṇe abheda jene’ re

guru kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha jene’ re

(smara) śrīnivāsa, haridāsa, murāri, mukunda

gaura-preme smara, smara re

smara śrīnivāsa haridāse (2)

                              97
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


Worship Gaura-Gadādhara, Advaita and the original guru
Nityānanda. Knowing Gaura and Kṛṣṇa to be the same, and
knowing the guru to be very dear to Kṛṣṇa, remember
Mahāprabhu’s intimate associates, Śrīvāsa, Haridāsa,
Murāri Gupta and Mukunda Dutta.



(smara) rūpa-sanātana-jīva-raghunātha-dvandva

kṛṣṇa-bhajana jadi korbe re, rūpa-sanātane smara

(smara) rāghava-gopāla-bhaṭṭa svarūpa-rāmānanda

kṛṣṇa-prema jadi cāo re, svarūpa-rāmānande smara (3)

Remember the Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana. If you worship Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, you should remember Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana. Also
remember Rāghava Paṇḍita, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa, Svarūpa
Dāmodara and Rāmānanda Rāya. If you really seek kṛṣṇa-
prema, you must remember Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāmānanda
Rāya.



(smara) goṣṭhi-saha karṇapūra, sena śivānanda

ajasra smara, smara re, goṣṭhi-saha karṇapūre

(smara) rūpānuga-sādhu-jana bhajana-ānanda

vraje vāsa jadi cāo re, rūpānuga-sādhu smara (4)

Remember Kavi Karṇapūra and his family members, who are
all sincere servants of Mahāprabhu. Also remember his
father Śivānanda Sena. Remember all those Vaiṣṇavas who
strictly follow the path of Rūpa Gosvāmī and who are
absorbed in the ecstasy of bhajana. If you actually want
residence in Vraja, you must remember all the Vaiṣṇavas
who are followers of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī.




Navadvīpa Bhajana-Kuṭira

Kalyāna-Kalpa-Taru, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



kabe ha’be heno daśa mor, tyaji’ jaḍa āśā,

vividha bandhana, chāḍibo saṁsāra ghora (1)

When, oh when will such a condition be mine that I will
repudiate all my mundane desires - which are keeping me
in a host of shackles - and let go of this dreadful
material existence?



vṛndābanābhede, navadvīpa-dhāme, bāndhibo kuṭīra-khāni

                           98
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


śacīra nandana-caraṇa-āśroya, koribo sambandha māni’ (2)

I will construct a small hut in Navadvīpa Dhāma, which
is non-different from Śrī Vṛndāvana. There I will
establish my relationship with Śrī Śacī-nandana, and
take shelter of His lotus feet.



jāhnavī-puline, cinmoya-kānane, bosiyā vijana-sthale

kṛṣṇa-nāmāmṛta, nirantara pibo, ḍākibo gaurāṅga bo’le
(3)

Living in a lonely place in a sacred forest on the bank
of the Jāhnavī (Gaṅgā), I will incessantly drink the
nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, and will loudly call out the
name of Gaurāṅga.



hā gaura-nitāi, torā du’ṭī bhāi, patita-janera bandhu

adhama patita, āmi he durjana, hao more kṛpā sindhu (4)

“O Gaura-Nitāi! You two brothers are the only true
friends of all the fallen souls! I am the lowest of the
low, most fallen and wicked-minded, so kindly bestow
Your ocean of mercy upon me!”



kāṅdite kāṅdite, ṣola-krośā-dhāma, jāhnavī ubhoya kūle

bhramite bhramite, kabhu bhāgya-phale, dekhi kichu taru-
mūle (5)

Thus repeatedly sobbing and calling out, I will roam
throughout 16 kroṝas (32 square miles) of the dhāma,
sometimes on one bank of the Jāhnavī and sometimes on
the other. And possibly, while wandering about, if I
receive a drop of good fortune, I will suddenly behold
some vision at the base of a tree .



hā hā manohara, ki dekhinu āmi, boliyā mūrchita ho’bo

samvita pāiyā, kāṅdibo gopane, smari du’hu kṛpā-lava (6)

I will blurt out: “Hā hā! How wonderful! What an amazing
thing I have seen now!” And I will faint on the spot.
Regaining consciousness later, I will hide and weep in
private, remembering that all this ecstasy is due to
receiving just a tiny speck of Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi’s
mercy.




Kabe Āhā Gaurāṅga Boliyā


                           99
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

Kalyāna-Kalpataru, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



kabe āhā gaurāṅga boliyā, bhojana-śayane,

deher jatana, chāḍibo virakta haṣā (1)

When will I ever cry out, "Alas, Gaurāṅga!" and,
becoming disgusted with sense enjoyment, give up all
bodily endeavors for eating and sleeping?



navadvīpa dhāme, nagare nagare, abhimāna parihari’

dhāma-bāsī-ghare, mādhukarī lobo’, khāibo udara bhari’
(2)

And when will I ever wander from village to village in
Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, completely giving up my false ego?
I will beg mādhukarī from the homes of the dhāma-vāsīs,
and thus fill my stomach.

nadī-taṭe giyā, añjali añjali, pibo prabhu-pada-jala

taru-tale poḍi’, ālasya tyajibo, pāibo śarīre bala (3)

Sometimes I will wander to the bank of the Gaṅgā and
drink, palmful by palmful, that sacred water that has
washed the lotus feet of the Lord. When tired, I will
simply fall down under the nearest tree, and when
revived, I will give up my idleness and continue
wandering here and there.



kākuti koriyā, ‘gaura-gadādhara’, ‘śrī-rādhā-mādhava’
nāma

kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā, ḍāki ucca-rave, bhramibo sakala dhāma
(4)

In a mood of humble solicitation, I will call out loudly
the names of Gaura-Gadādhara and Śrī Radhā-Mādhava!
Deeply weeping, I will wander throughout the entire
dhāma.



vaiṣṇava dekhiyā, paḍibo caraṇe, hṛdayer bandhu jāni’

vaiṣṇava ṭhākura, ‘prabhura kīrtana’, dekhāibe dāsa
māni’ (5)

Seeing a Vaiṣṇava, I will fall at his lotus feet,
knowing him to be the true friend of my heart. Accepting
me as his servant, the venerable devotee will then
reveal to me the confidential kīrtana of Mahāprabhu.




                          100
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

Kabe Gaura-Vane

Śaraṇāgati, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



kabe gaura-vane suradhunī-taṭe, ‘hā rādhe hā kṛṣṇa’ bole

kāṅdiyā beḍābo, deho sukha chāḍi, nānā latā taru-tale
(1)

Oh, when will the day come when, renouncing all bodily
pleasures, I will wander along the banks of the Gaṅgā
under the shade of all the many trees and creepers,
weeping and calling out, “Hā Rādhā! Hā Kṛṣṇa!”?



(kabe) śvapaca-gṛhete, mÃgiyā khaibo, pibo sarasvatī-
jala

puline puline, gaḍā-gaḍi dibo, kori kṛṣṇa-kolāholo (2)

Oh, when will I beg eatables from the houses of the
untouchables and drink water from the Sarasvatī and in
this way maintain my life? When will I roll on the banks
of the sacred rivers, causing an uproar by loudly
calling, “O Kṛṣṇa! O Kṛṣṇa!”?



(kabe) dhāma-vāsī-jane, praṇati koriyā, māgibo kṛpāra
leśa

vaiṣṇava-caraṇa-reṇu gāya mākhi, dhori avadhūta veśa (3)

Oh, when will I offer praṇāma to all the residents of
the dhāma, begging one drop of mercy from them? I will
don the cloth of an avadhūta (one above societal
conventions, mad with prema) and smear the footdust of
the Vaiṣṇavas all over my body.



(kabe) gauḍa-braja-jane, bheda nā dekhibo, hoibo baraja-
vāsī

(takhana) dhāmera svarūpa, sphuribe nayane, hoibo
rādhāra dāsī (4)

When I will no longer distinguish between the residents
of Navadvīpa and Vṛndāvana, I will become a real
Vrajavāsī. The cinmaya form of the dhāma will bestow
upon me her darśana, and I will become a maidservant of
Śrī Rādhājī.




Vibhāvarī Śeṣa – End of Night

Kalyāṇa-kalpataru, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura


                          101
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



vibhāvarī śeṣa, āloka-praveśa,

nidrā chāḍi’ uṭho jīva

bolo hari hari, mukunda murāri,

rāma kṛṣṇa hayagrīva (1)

Night is over; the light of dawn is coming – Arise, O
soul, give up your sleep! Chant the names of Hari!
Mukunda! Murāri! Rāma! Kṛṣṇa! and Hayagrīva!

Hari steals all our anarthas, sins, and miseries.
Mukunda easily gives liberation and more than that,
prema sukha. His smiling face is beautiful like the very
fragrant white kunda flower. Murāri killed the Mura
demon‚ who represents all the bad things in our heart.
Rāma – Kṛṣṇa’s expansion as His elder brother Balarāma.
Kṛṣṇa—the attractor of all living beings. Hayagrīva –
the incarnation of Rāma and Kṛṣṇa with the head of a
horse who gave the Vedas and Upaniṣads.



nṛsiṁha vāmana, śrī madhusūdana,

vrajendra-nandana śyāma

pūtanā-ghātana, kaiṭabha-śātana,

jaya dāśarathi-rāma (2)

Nṛsiṁha, Vāmana, Śrī Madhusūdana, the son of Nanda
Mahārāja, Śyāma! He is the killer of Pūtanā and
Kaiṭabha! All glories to the son of King Daśaratha, Lord
Rāma!

Nṛsiṁha removes obstacles to devotion, thus allowing
love and affection to develop in the devotee’s heart.
Vāmana cheated Bali Mahārāja and returned the kingdom to
the demigods. Bali surrendered himself to Vāmanadeva,
who helps the devotees achieve ātma-nivedana, full
surrender. Śrī Madhusūdana removes all attachment to the
material world and always tastes madhu, the nectar of
the lips of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Vrajendra-nandana Śyāma
always stays in Vraja and beautifies (śyāma) His abode.
Pūtanā-ghātana removes impurities from the heart of the
jīva. Kaiṭabha-śātana destroys duplicity.



yaśodā-dulāla, govinda gopāla,

vṛndāvana-purandara

gopī-priya-jana, rādhikā-ramaṇa,

bhuvana-sundara-bara (3)

He is the darling son of Yaśodā (yaśodā-dulāla), He
supports, nourishes and gives pleasure to the cows,
their pastures, all gopas and gopīs (govinda gopāla),

                           102
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

the King (Indra) of Vṛndāvana (vṛndāvana- purandara),
the dearmost beloved of the gopīs (gopī-priya-jana),
always giving pleasure to Rādhikā and She to Him
(rādhikā-ramaṇa), He is the unsurpassed beauty of the
entire world (bhuvana-sundara-bara)!



rāvāṇāntakara, mākhana-taskara,

gopī-jana-vastra-hārī

vrajera rākhāla, gopa-vṛnda-pāla,

citta-hārī vaṁśī-dhārī (4)

To Rāvāṇa, who stole Sita, thinking that Bhagavān is
without potency, He is death personified
(rāvāṇāntakara); to the elderly gopīs, a butterthief,
stealing their love and affection in the form of their
butter (mākhana-taskara); He is the thief of the
garments of the very young gopīs who are His very own
potency (gopī-jana-vastra-hārī); He is the protector and
maintainer of Vraja (vrajera rākhāla); guardian of the
gopas (gopa-vṛnda-pāla); He steals the hearts of all
with His flute (citta-hārī vaṁśī-dhārī).



yogīndra-vandana, śrī nanda-nandana,

vraja-jana-bhaya-hārī

navīna-nīrada, rūpa-manohara,

mohana-vaṁśī-bihārī (5)

He is always worshiped by the great yogīs, Śukadeva,
Nārada, Vyāsa (yogīndra-vandana); the beautiful son of
Nanda Mahārāja (śrī nanda-nandana); He removes the fears
of the residents of Vraja (vraja-jana-bhaya-hārī); He is
like a fresh rain-cloud (navīna nīrada); enchanting the
minds of the Vrajavāsīs with His beauty (rūpa manohara);
He wanders about, playing the flute and charming
everyone (mohana-vaṁśī-bihārī)!



yaśodā-nandana, kaṁsa-nisūdana,

nikuñja-rāsa-vilāsī

kadamba-kānana, rāsa-parāyaṇa,

vṛndā-vipina-nivāsī (6)

He is Yaśodā’s sweet, soft little boy (yaśodā-nandana),
and on the other hand the killer of Kaṁsa (kaṁsa-
nisūdana). He performs His confidential loving affairs
in the pleasure-groves of Vṛndāvana (nikuñja-rāsa-
vilāsī). He is devoted to enjoying rāsa (rāsa-parāyaṇa)
in the kuñjas in the vast Kadamba garden (kadamba-
kānana).


                             103
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



ānanda-varddhana, prema-niketana,

phula-śara-yojaka kāma

gopāṅganā-gaṇa-citta-vinodana,

samasta-guṇa-gaṇa-dhāma (7)

He enhances the ocean of bliss (ānanda-varddhana); He is
the divine abode of pure love (prema-niketana); He is
the transcendental Cupid who incites the beautiful
gopīs’ kāma or divine lust with five flowered arrows
(phula-śara-yojaka kāma); giving pleasure to the gopīs’
hearts (gopāṅganā-gaṇa-citta-vinodana); He is the abode
of all good qualities (samasta-guṇa-dhāma)!



yāmuna-jīvana, keli-parāyaṇa,

mānasa-candra-cakora

nāma-sudhā-rasa, gāo kṛṣṇa-jaśa

rākho vacana mana mora (8)

Yamunā is the life of Kṛṣṇa because He does rāsa on her
banks, and He is the life of Yamunā because He does
jala-keli (frolics) in her waters (yāmuna-jīvana); He is
always absorbed in amorous pastimes (keli-parāyaṇa); He
is the moon of the gopīs’ minds, which are like cakora
birds who subsist only upon moonlight (mānasa-candra-
cakora). “O mind, always remember these words (rākha
vacana mana mora) and sing Kṛṣṇa’s glories (gāo kṛṣṇa-
jaśa) in the form of these holy names which are full of
nectar (nāma-sudhā-rasa).”




Yaśomatī-Nandana

—The Son of Mother Yaśoda —

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



yaśomatī-nandana, vraja-varo-nāgara,

gokula-rañjana kāna

gopī-parāṇa-dhana, madana-manohara,

kālīya-damana-vidhāna (1)

Kṛṣṇa is Yaśodā Maiyā’s beloved son, and the topmost
lover in Vrajabhumi. As Kāna (an affectionate name for
Him) He delights Gokula and is the wealth of the life of
the gopīs. He is an inveterate thief, stealing the
hearts of all, and He crushed the Kālīya serpent.

                             104
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017




amala harināma amiya-vilāsā

vipina-purandara, navīna-nāgara-vara,

vaṁśī-vadana, suvāsā (2)

These spotless holy names are filled with all of Kṛṣṇa’s
sweet pastimes. He is the King (purandara—Indra) of all
the forests of Vraja. He is the ever-fresh and ever-
youthful lover, always wearing very beautiful garments,
attracting the gopīs with His bodily fragrance, and
holding the flute to His mouth.



vraja-jana-pālana, asura-kula-nāśana,

nanda-godhana-rākhowālā

govinda, mādhava, navanīta-taskara,

sundara nanda-gopālā (3)

He always protects the Vrajavāsīs, destroys the demons,
and tends Nanda Bābā’s cows. As Govinda He gives
pleasure to the cows, the land, gopas, gopīs, and the
senses. As Mādhava He is the husband of the topmost
Lakṣmī—Srīmatī Rādhikā. He’s always stealing butter (the
prema of the Vrajavāsīs) to increase the Vrajavāsīs’
love for Him and He is the beautiful son of Nanda Bābā.



yāmuna-taṭa-cara, gopī-vasanahara,

rāsa-rasika kṛpāmaya

śrī rādhā-ballabha, vṛndāvana-naṭavara,

bhakativinoda-āśraya (4)

Roaming along the banks of Yamunā, He stole the clothes
of the very young gopīs. He is the enjoyer of the rāsa
dance and is full of mercy. He is most beloved to
Srīmatī Rādhikārāṇī and is the most expert dancer in
Vṛndavāna. Bhaktivinoda wants to take shelter of this
Kṛṣṇa!




Janama Saphala Tā’ra

Description of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Beautiful Form

Kalyāṇa-kalpataru, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



janama saphala tā’ra, kṛṣṇa-daraśana jāra, bhāgye

                           105
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

hoiyāche eka-bār

vikaśiyā hṛn-nayana, kori’ kṛṣṇa-daraśana, chāḍe jīva
cittera vikāra (1)

Aho! His birth is successful who, by good fortune, has
had darśana of Kṛṣṇa one time, because by seeing Him
with the eyes of devotion, all the causes of
transformation of the mind (lust, greed, anger, and
other anarthas) go far away.



vṛndāvana-keli catur vana-mālī, tri-bhaṅga-bhaṅgima
rūpa,

vaṁśī-dhārī aparūpa, rasamoya-nidhi, guṇa-śālī (2)

Bedecked with garlands of forest flowers, He expertly
engages in amorous enjoyment in Vṛndāvana. Standing in
His three-curved form and holding His flute, He thus
displays His unprecedented beauty. He is an ocean of
rasa and a reservoir of all good qualities.



varṇa-nava-jaladhara, śire śikhi piccha vara, alakā
tilaka śobhā pāya,

paridhāne pīta-vāsa, badane madhura hāsa, heno rūpa
jagata mātāya (3)

His bodily complexion is like a fresh rain cloud. He
wears a peacock feather on His head, and His forehead is
beautifully decorated with candana tilaka. Wearing a
golden pītāmbara and smiling so sweetly, He maddens the
whole world with His beauty.



indranīla jini, kṛṣṇa-rūpa khāni, heriyā kadamba-mūle,

mana ucāṭana, nā cale caraṇa, saṁsāra gelāma bhūle (4)

Oh! Now that I have seen that form of Kṛṣṇa, more
beautiful than a blackish indranīla jewel, standing
under a kadamba tree, my mind has become unsteady. I
cannot move from here and have forgotten the material
world.



(sakhī he) sudhāmoya, se rūpa-mādhurī,

dekhile nayana, hoya acetana, jhare premamoya vāri (5)

He sakhī! His sweet form is full of nectar. Whoever sees
Him falls unconscious, and tears of love stream from
their eyes.

kibā cūḍā śire, kibā vaṁśī kore, kibā se tri-bhaṅga-
ṭhāma,

caraṇa-kamale, amiyā uchale, tāhāte nūpura-dāma (6)

                          106
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


Oh, how wonderful is the peacock-feather crown on His
head, the flute in His hands, His body bent in three
places, and His feet, bound with anklebells which shower
nectar!



sadā āśā kori, bhṛṅga-rūpa dhori’, caraṇa-kamale sthāna

anāyāse pāi, kṛṣṇa-guṇa gāi, āra nā bhajibo āna (7)

Bhaktivinoda says, “I always desire to become a bee so
that I can eternally stay at His lotus feet. Thus I will
easily sing of Kṛṣṇa’s glories and will never ask for
anything more than this.”




Brajendra-Nandana, Bhaje Jei Jana


Śrīla Locana dāsa Ṭhākura



brajendra-nandana, bhaje jei jana, saphala jīvana tā’ra,

tāhāra upamā, vede nāhi sīmā, tri-bhuvane nāhi āra (1)

That person who worships Brajendra-nandana makes his
life successful. In the three worlds there is none equal
to Him. The Vedas cannot completely describe His
glories.



emona mādhava, nā bhaje mānava, kokhono mariyā jābe,

sei se adhama, prahāriyā yama, raurave kṛmite khābe (2)

Whoever fails to worship that Śrī Mādhava is taken to
Yamarāja after death and put in the hell called Raurava-
loka (where he is eaten alive by worms and insects).
There is no one as sinful as him.



tāra par āra, pāpī nāhi chāra, saṁsāra jagat-mājhe,

kaunkāle tāra, gati nāhi āra, michāi bhramiche kāje (3)

Since there is no greater sinner than he throughout the
universe, he cannot be delivered at any time but
continues to wander, performing temporary materialistic
activities that result in suffering.



śrī locana dāsa, bhakatira āśa, hari-guṇa kahi likhi,

heno rasa-sāra, mati nāhi jāra, tāra mukha nāhi dekhi

                            107
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

(4)

Śrī Locana dāsa states, “Only by my desire to obtain
bhakti am I able to describe Śrī Hari’s qualities. I
never wish to see the face of that person whose
intelligence is not fixed on Brajendra-nandana, the very
essence and embodiment of all rasa.




Bandhu-Saṅge


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura

(Bengali translation of Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Sanskrit verse)



bandhu-saṅge jadi tava raṅga, parihāsa, thāke abhilāṣa

tabe mora kathā rākho, jeyo nāko jeyo nāko

mathurāya keśī-tīrtha-ghāṭera sakāśa (1)

If you want to enjoy laughing and joking with friends
and family, if this is really your desire, then listen
to me. Don’t go, don’t go to Mathurā (Vṛndāvana) to
Keśī-ghāṭa.



govinda vigraha dhari, tathāya āchena hari

nayane baṅkima dṛṣṭi, mukhe manda-hāsa

kivā tri-bhaṅgama ṭhāma, varṇa samujjvala śyāma

nava-kiśalaya śobhā śrī aṅge prakāśa (2)

There Śrī Hari has taken the form of Govinda, who gives
pleasure to all, whose crooked glance is quite
captivating, whose mouth is gently smiling, who is
standing in His tribaṅga pose, whose complexion is a
very effulgent śyāma color, and whose limbs are
attractive like tender new leaves.



adhare vaṁśīṭī tāra, anarthera mūlādhāra

śikhi-cūḍākeo bhāi koro nā viśvāsa (3)

The sound of His vamśī enthroned upon His lips is the
root cause of madness. Brother, have no faith in that
person who wears a crest of peacock feathers.



se mūrti nayane here, keho nāhi ghare phire,

saṁsārī gṛhīra je go hoya sarva-nāśa

                             108
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


(tāi mora mane baḍa trāsa)

ghaṭibe vipada bhārī, jeyo nāko he saṁsāri

mathurāya keśī-tīrtha-ghāṭera sakāśa (4)

If you see that form, you will not be able to return
home again. Your family life will be destroyed. (This is
my great fear!) There will be great danger if you go
there. If you want to enjoy family life, don’t go to
Mathurā near Keśī-ghāṭa.




Śrī Rādhā-Bhajana Mahimā—Rādhā-Bhajane Jadi

—Glorification of Worshiping Śrī Rādhā—

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



rādhā-bhajane jadi mati nāhi bhelā

kṛṣṇa-bhajana taba akāraṇa gelā (1)

If the desire to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā does not appear
in my heart, then my worship of Kṛṣṇa is simply useless.

ātapa-rohita sūraya nāhi jāni

rādhā-virahita mādhava nāhi māni (2)

Just as the sun cannot be perceived without sunlight, in
the same way I do not recognize Mādhava without Rādhā.



kevala mādhava pūjaye, so ajñānī

rādhā-anādara koroi abhimānī (3)

Those who worship Mādhava alone are ignorant; they
simply neglect Śrīmatī Rādhikā out of their mundane
pride.



kabahī nāhi korobi tākora saṅga

citte icchasi jadi vraja-rasa-raṅga (4)

Don’t ever associate with such persons if you desire the
loving playfulness of vraja-rasa to appear in your
heart.



rādhikā-dāsī jadi hoya abhimāna

śīgrai milai taba gokula-kāna (5)

                             109
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017


If you develop pride in being Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
exclusive maidservant, then very quickly you will meet
Gokula Kāna.



brahmā, śiva, nārada, śruti, nārāyaṇī

rādhikā-pada-raja pūjaye māni (6)

Brahmā, Śiva, Nārada, the Śruti-cari ṛṣīs and Nārāyāṇī
honor and worship the dust of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s lotus
feet.



umā, ramā, satyā, śacī, candrā, rukmiṇī

rādhā avatāra sabe—āmnāya-vāṇī (7)

Our āmnāya, revealed scriptures, declare that Umā, Ramā,
Satyā, Śacī, Candrāvalī and Rukmiṇī are all Rādhā’s
expansions.



heno rādhā-paricaryā jākara dhana

bhakativinoda tāra māgaye caraṇa (8)

Bhaktivinoda is begging at the lotus feet of those whose
wealth is the service of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.




Rādhikā-Caraṇa-Padma

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



rādhikā-caraṇa-padma, sakala śreyera sadma,

jatane je nāhi ārādhilo

rādhā-padmāṅkita-dhāma, bṛndābana jāra nāma,

tāhā je nā āśroy korilo (1)



rādhikā-bhāva-gambhīra citta jebā mahādhīra

gaṇa-saṅga nā koilo jībane

kemone se śyāmānanda, rasa-sindhu-snānānanda,

labhibe bujhoha eka-mane (2)

One who has failed to worship with great care Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s lotus feet, which are the abode of all

                             110
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

auspiciousness; who has not taken shelter of Vṛndāvana
dhāma, which is decorated with Her beautiful lotus
footprints; who in this life has not associated with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s devotees whose moods, like Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s, are very deep and grave, and whose hearts and
intelligence are fixed in Her worship—how will such a
person ever experience the bliss of bathing in the ocean
of śyāma-rasa? Please understand this most attentively!



rādhikā ujjvala-raser ācārya

rādhā-mādhaba-śuddha-prema bicārya (3)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the ācārya of the mellows of amorous
love (ujjvala-rasa). The pure love between Rādhā and
Mādhava is meant to be discussed and contemplated.



je dharilo rādhā-pada parama jatane

se pāilo kṛṣṇa-pada amūlya-ratane (4)

Those who place Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s lotus feet in their
hearts and worship them with great care obtain the
priceless jewel of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.



rādhā-pada binā kabhu kṛṣṇa nāhi mile

rādhāra dāsīra kṛṣṇa sarva-bede bole (5)

Without taking shelter of the lotus feet of Rādhā, one
can never meet Kṛṣṇa. The Vedic scriptures declare that
Kṛṣṇa is the property of the maidservants of Śrī Rādhā.



choḍata dhana-jan, kalatra-suta-mita,

choḍata karama geyāna

rādhā-pada-paṅkaja, madhu-rata sebana,

bhakativinoda paramāṇa (6)

Abandoning wealth, followers, wife, sons, and friends,
and giving up materialistic activities and speculative
knowledge, one should become absorbed in the sweetness
of service to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet. This is
Bhaktivinoda’s solemn declaration.




Additional Glorifications of Śrīmatī Rādhīkā

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



                             111
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




Ramaṇī-Śiromaṇi

ramaṇī-śiromaṇi, vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, nīla-vasana-
paridhānā

chinna-puraṭa jini, varna-vikāśini, baddha-kavarī hari-
prāṇā (1)

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the crest jewel of all beautiful
young madiens. She is the beloved daughter of King
Bṛṣabhānu and is very fond of wearing blue colored
garments. The ever-blossoming attractiveness of Her
complexion conquers the effulgence of molten gold, and
into Her braided hair She twists up the breath of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s life.



ābharaṇa-maṇḍitā, hari-rasa-paṇḍitā, tilaka-suśobhita-
bhālā

kañculikāchāditā, stana-maṇi-maṇḍitā, kajjala-nayanī
rasālā (2)

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is adorned with twelve types of golden
ornaments which dazzle like a host of shining suns. She
is fully qualified in the science of pleasing Kṛṣṇa, and
the tilaka of Her great fortune shines on Her beautiful
forehead. Her jewel-like breasts are covered with the
exquisite blouse of Her affection and sweet anger for
Kṛṣṇa. Her eyes are artistically anointed with the black
kajjala of Her tricky behavior with Her beloved.



sakala tyajiyā se rādhā-caraṇe, dāsī ho’ye bhaja parama-
jatane (3)

Give up everything and become an unpaid maidservant at
the lotus feet of Rādhārāṇī. Just worship Her and serve
Her with great care and attention.



saundarya-kiraṇa dekhiyā jāhāra, rati-gaurī-līlā garva-
parihāra (4)

Beholding just one effulgent ray of Her beauty, Rati
(wife of Kāmadeva), Gaurī and Līlā (śakti of Nārāyaṇa)
abandon all their pride.



śacī-lakṣmī-satyā saubhāgya bolane, parājita hoya yāhāra
caraṇe (5)

Her good fortune is such that Śacī (wife of Indra),
Lakṣmī and Satyābhāma are defeated at Her lotus feet.




                          112
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-vaśīkāre candrāvalī-ādi, parājaya māne hoiyā
vivādī (6)

Candrāvalī and the other gopīs all compete with
Rādhārāṇī for Kṛṣṇa’s favor. Yet all accept their defeat
before Her, for She alone controls Kṛṣṇa.



hari-dayitā rādhā caraṇa preyāsī, bhakativinoda śrī-
godruma-vāsī (7)

Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda is most dear to Śrī Hari and a
resident of Godruma, fully surrendered to lotus feet of
Śrī Gaurasundara. Yet he is satisfied only when taking
shelter of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet.




Rasika Nāgarī

rasika nāgarī, gaṇa-śiromaṇi, kṛṣṇa-preme sara-haṁsī

vṛṣabhānu-rāja, śuddha kalpa-vallī, sarva-lakṣmī-gaṇa-
aṁśī (1)

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī,when controlled by rasika-śekhara Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, is the enjoyer of amorous mellows and is the
crest jewel of all the gopīs. She is the beautiful swan
swimming in the depths of the pond of Kṛṣṇa’s prema, a
pure wish-fulfilling creeper on the family tree of
Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu, and the source of all the goddesses
of fortune.



rakta paṭṭa-vastra, nitamba-upari, kṣudra ghaṇṭi dule
tā’ya

kuca-yugopari, duli’ muktā-mālā, citta-hārī śobhā paya
(2)

Her red veil, extending down to Her hips, is fastened
around Her waist with a sash from which tiny bells are
strung (whose sound goes to Kṛṣṇa’s heart and makes Him
faint), and hanging down upon Her breasts is a long
pearl necklace with a large locket which sways as She
moves along in Her slow elephant gait. Walking in this
way, She steals Kṛṣṇa’s heart with Her beauty and gives
Him pleasure.



sarasija-bara-karṇikā-samāna, atiśoya kāntimatī

kaiśora-amṛta, tāruṇya-karpūra, miṣra-smitādharā satī
(3)

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s bodily luster (from   Her ever-fresh,
new bhavas) brilliantly shines like the   golden whorl of
a lotus blooming in the pond of Kṛṣṇa’s   heart. The sweet
nectar of Her fresh adolescence and the   fragrant camphor

                          113
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

of Her newly sprouting youth mix together in the sweet
smile playing on Her chaste lips.



vanānte āgatā, vraja-pati-sutā, parama-cañcala-bare

heri śaṅkākula, nayana-bhaṅgite, ādarete stava kore (4)

Seeing that the son of Nanda has arrived in Javaṭa as He
was returning from cow-grazing in the forest, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā hides, causing Him extreme agitation. After His
anxious search for Her, They meet through Their eyes,
and He respectfully offers Her affectionate prayers to
gain Her favor.



vrajera mahilā, gaṇera parāṇa, yaśomatī-priya-pātrī

lalita lalitā snehete prafulla-śarīrā lalita-gātrī (5)

She is the life and soul of all the Vraja gopīs and is
especially the prized object of Mother Yaśodā’s love.
Due to the joyful affection of the contrary Lalitā-devī,
Rādhārāṇī’s body bursts with prema like a fully bloomed
lotus.



viśākhāra sane, vana-phula tuli, gāṅthe vaijayantī mālā

sakala-śreyasī, kṛṣṇa-bakṣaḥ-sthitā, parama-preyasī bālā
(6)

Accompanied by the expert Viśakhā, Rādhārāṇī picks
forest flowers and makes a vaijayantī mālā for Kṛṣṇa.
Thus Śrīmatī Rādhā, superior to all the gopīs, always
plays on Kṛṣṇa’s chest, being the dearmost of all
lovable damsels.



snigdha veṇu-rabe, druta-gati jāi, kuñje peye naṭavare

hasita-nayanī, namra-mukhī satī, karṇa kaṇḍūyana kore
(7)

Running swiftly at the warming sound of the flute and
finding Her beloved naṭavara Kṛṣṇa in the kuñja, Rādhā
with smiling eyes shyly looks down and scratches Her
ear, thus indicating Her desire.



sparśiyā kamala, bāyu su-śītala, kore jabe kuṇḍa-nīra

nidāghe tathāya, nija-gaṇa saha, tuṣaya gokula-bīra (8)

When the breeze, heavy with the fragrance of lotus
flowers, cools down the waters of Rādhā-kuṇḍa in the
heat of the summer, Rādhā along with all Her girlfriends
(playing with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the water) satisfies the hero
of Gokula.

                          114
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




bhakativinoda, rūpa-raghunāthe, kohaye caraṇa dhori

heno rādhā-dāsye, sudhīra-sampada, kabe dibe kṛpā kori
(9)

Bhaktivinoda prays to Rūpa and Raghunātha, clasping
their lotus feet, “When will you give me your mercy and
bestow upon me service to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, which is
the wealth of the truly wise?”




Varaja-Vipine

varaja-vipine yamunā-kule, mañca manohara śobhita phule
(1)

In the forests of Vraja, on the banks of the Yamunā, are
enchanting jeweled thrones embellished with the nearby
flowers of all the seasons blooming at once.



vanaspati-latā tuṣaye ākhi, tad upari kata ḍākaye pākhī
(2)

The many varieties of creepers and fruit trees in those
forests give satisfaction to the eyes, and upon the
branches of these trees sit many birds singing sweetly.



malaya anilo bahaye dhīre, ali-kula madhu-lobheye phire
(3)

A fragrant breeze from the Malaya hills blows gently,
and a swarm of bumblebees flies about, greedily
searching for nectar.



vāsantīra rākā urupa tadā, kaumudī bitore ādare sadā (4)

The full moon of the spring season diffuses an unending
stream of cooling rays with fervent reverence.



emata samaye rasika-bara, ārambhilo rāsa mūralīdhara (5)

At such a suitable time as this, the supreme enjoyer,
Mūralīdhara Śrī Kṛṣṇa, holding His flute, begins the
rāsa dance.



śata-koṭī gopī mājhete hari, rādhā-saha nāce ānanda kori
(6)


                          115
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Rejoicing in the midst of millions of lovely cowherd
maidens, Śrī Kṛṣṇa dances with Rādhārāṇī in the middle
of all with great pleasure.

mādhava-mohinī gāiyā gīta‚ harilo sakala jagata-cita (7)

Rādhā enchants Mādhava with Her bewitching songs and
steals away the minds of all living beings.



sthābara-jaṅgama mohilā satī, hārāolo candrā-balīra mati
(8)

Seeing the beautiful rāsa-līlā, all moving and non-
moving beings change their natures, chaste ladies give
up their dharma, and Candrāvalī’s heart melts without
control.



mathiyā baraja-kiśora-mana, antarita hoya rādhā takhon
(9)

After churning Vraja-Kiśora’s heart with Her many
expressions of love and affection, Rādhārāṇī disappears
from the (vasanti) rāsa.



bhakativinoda paramāda gaṇe, rāsa bhāṅgalo (āji) rādhā
vihane (10)

Bhaktivinoda perceives some calamity now that the rāsa
dance has stopped without Rādhā.




Śata-Koṭi Gopī

śata-koṭi gopī mādhava-mana, rākhite nārilo kori jatana
(1)

Millions of lovely cowherd damsels are unable to keep
Mādhava's attention, although endeavoring very hard to
do so.



veṇu-gīte dāke rādhikā-nāma, eso eso rādhe! ḍakoye śyāma
(2)

The flute song calls the name of Rādhikā, and Śrī
Śyāmasundara petitions Her, “Come here, come here,
Rādhā!”



bhāṅgiyā śrī-rāsa-maṇḍala tabe, rādhā-anveṣaṇe calaye
jabe (3)

When He goes in search of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the rāsa

                          116
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

dance comes to a halt.



dekhā diyā rādhe! rākhoha prāṇa! boliya kāṅdaye kānane
kāna (4)

Searching for Her everywhere in the forest, Kāna weeps
and calls out, “O beloved Rādhā, please appear before
Me. Save My life by giving Me Your darśana!”



nirjana kānane, rādhāre dhori, miliyā parāṇa juḍāya hari
(5)

Meeting Rādhikā in a remote place in the woods, Hari
embraces Her, thus reviving His life.



bole, tūhu vinā kāhāra rāsa? tūhu lāgi mora varaja-vāsa
(6)

Kṛṣṇa says to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, “Without You, what is the
question of a rāsa dance? Only because of You do I live
in Vraja.”

e heno rādhikā-caraṇa-tale, bhakativinoda kāṅdiyā bole

“tuwā gaṇa-mājhe āmāre gaṇi, kinkorī koriyā rakho apani”
(7-8)

Weeping at the lotus feet of this Rādhikā, Bhaktivinoda
says, “O Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, count me among Your personal
associates, make me Your maidservant, and please keep me
as Your own.”




Śrī-Rādhā-Niṣṭhā

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



rādhikā-caraṇa-renu, bhūṣaṇa koriyā tanu

anāyāse pābe giridhārī

rādhikā-caraṇāśraya, je kore se mahāśaya

tÃre mói jāo bolihārī (1)

Ornament your body with the dust of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
lotus feet and you will easily attain Giridhārī. I
congratulate such a great soul who takes shelter of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s lotus feet and I say to him, “Well
done! Bravo! Excellent!”




                            117
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

jaya jaya rādhā-nāma bṛndābana jÃra dhāma

kṛṣṇa-sukha vilāsera nidhi

heno rādhā guṇa gāna, na sunilo mora kāna

bañcito korilo more bidhi (2)

All glories, all glories to She whose name is Rādhā,
whose divine abode is Vṛndāvana, and who is a treasury
of pastimes that bring joy to Kṛṣṇa. Alas! If my ears
have not heard Rādhā’s glories, then destiny has cheated
me.



tÃra bhakta saṅge sadā, rasa-līlā prema kathā

je kore se pāya ghanaśyāma

ihāte bimukha jei, tāra kabhu siddhi nāi,

nāhi jeno śuni tÃra nāma (3)

A person who stays in the company of the devotees who
are always discussing Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s rasa-filled loving
pastimes (rasa-līlā prema kathā) is sure to attain
Ghanaśyāma, who is dark like a monsoon raincloud. A
person averse to this will never attain perfection - let
me not even hear his name.



kṛṣṇa-nāma gāne bhai, rādhikā-caraṇa pāi

rādhā-nāma gāne kṛṣṇacandra

saṅkṣepe kahinu kathā, ghucāo manera byathā

duḥkhamaya anya kathā dvandva (4)

O brother, by chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name you will attain
Rādhā, and by chanting Rādhā’s name you will attain
Kṛṣṇacandra. Now I have briefly told you how to find
relief from all the sufferings in your heart. Whatever
contradicts these words will bring only pain and
conflict.




Vṛndāvana-Vilāsinī, Rādhe Rādhe



rādhe, rādhe, rādhe rādhe

vṛndāvana-vilāsinī, rādhe rādhe

vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, rādhe rādhe

govinda-nandinī, rādhe rādhe


                             118
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

kānu-mana-mohinī, rādhe rādhe

aṣṭa-sakhīra śiromaṇi, rādhe rādhe

parama-karuṇāmayī, rādhe rādhe

prema-bhakti-pradāyinī, rādhe rādhe

ei bāra more doyā koro, rādhe rādhe

aparādha kṣamā koro, rādhe rādhe

sevā adhikāra diyo, rādhe rādhe

tomāra kāṅgāla tomāya ḍāko, rādhe rādhe




Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



jaya rādhā-mādhava jaya kuñja-bihārī

gopī-jana-vallabha jaya giri-vara-dhārī

yaśodā-nandana, braja-jana-rañjana

yamunā-tīra-vanacārī

All glories to Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava! All glories to Kuñja-
Bihārī, who is the gopīs’ dearmost beloved. He lifted
Govardhana Hill and is the darling son of Yaśodā Maiyā.
He wanders in the forests along the banks of the Yamunā,
where He enjoys with the many different gopīs (vanacārī)
in their own groves.




Jaya Jaya Rādhe Kṛṣṇa Govinda



jaya jaya rādhe kṛṣṇa govinda

rādhe govinda rādhe govinda (1)

jaya jaya śyāmasundara, madana-mohana, vṛndāvana-candra

jaya jaya rādhā-ramaṇa, rāsabihāri, śrī gokulānanda (2)

jaya jaya rāseśvarī, vinodinī, bhānukula-candra

jaya jaya lalitā, viśākhā ādi jata sakhī-vṛnda (3)

jaya jaya paurṇamāsī, yoga-māyā, jaya bīrā-vṛnda

jaya jaya śrī rūpa-mañjarī, rati-mañjarī-anaṅga (4)

                          119
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


sabe mili koro kṛpā āmi ati manda

(tomarā) kṛpā kori deha-yugala-caraṇāravinda (5)

(5) May all of You together bestow mercy upon me – I am
so low and unfortunate. By Your mercy I will attain the
service of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa yugala-kiśora.



Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Vijñapti—Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Pada-Kamale

Kalyāṇa–kalpataru - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



śrī rādhā-kṛṣṇa pada-kamale mana

kemone labhibe carama śaraṇa

cira-dina koriyā o-caraṇa-āśa

āche he bosiyā e adhama dāsa (1)

O mind, how is it possible to attain the ultimate
shelter – the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa? This
wretched servant has been waiting since time immemorial,
sustaining hope against hope for Your shelter.



he rādhe! he kṛṣṇacandra! bhakta prāṇa

pāmare yugala-bhakti kor’ dāna

bhakti-hīna boli’ nā koro upekṣā

mūrkha-jane deho’ jñāna-suśikṣā (2)

O Rādhe! O Kṛṣṇacandra! I know I am pāmara, most wicked,
but please be merciful and give me bhakti for You. I am
completely bereft of devotion so surely You cannot
neglect me. I am such a foolish person, mūrkha-jana, but
still, please bestow upon me devotional knowledge and
instructions.



viṣaya-pipāsā-prapīḍita-dāse

deho adhikāra yugala-vilāse (3)

It is true, I am so absorbed and troubled by my thirst
for material enjoyment. So please give me entrance into
the service of Your amorous pastimes.



cañcala-jīvana-srota pravāhiyā

kālera sāgare dhāya

gelo ye divasa, nā āsibe āra

                          120
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


ebe kṛṣṇa ki upāya (4)

This flickering life is rushing towards the ocean of
death and can end at any moment. The days that have
passed without performing bhajana can never be
reclaimed. Alas, Kṛṣṇa, now what am I to do?



tumi patita janera bandhu

jāni he tomāre nātha

tumi to’ koruṇā-jala-sindhu (5)

O my masters, I know that You are the true friends of
the fallen and the very ocean of kindness. (There is no
limit to Your mercy.)



āmi bhāgya-hīna, ati arvācīna

nā jāni bhakati-leśa

nija-guṇe nātha, koro ātmasāt

ghucāiyā bhava-kleśa (6)

I am devoid of all good fortune and extremely foolish. I
have not even a scent of bhakti. He Nātha! By Your
greatness, let me become totally absorbed in You,
thereby giving me relief from the pangs of material
sufferings.



siddha deha diyā, vṛndāvana mājhe

sevāmṛta-koro dāna

piyāiyā prema, matta kori more

suno nija guṇa-gāna (7)

Please bestow upon me my siddha-deha. Place me in the
midst of Vṛndāvana, and shower upon me the nectar of
Your devotional service. Allow me to drink the nectar of
Your prema and let me be fully absorbed in it, so much
so that I become maddened. Then You will be able to hear
me sing about Your astonishing attributes.



yugala sevāya, śrī rāsa-maṇḍale

niyukta koro’ āmāya

lalitā sakhīra, ayogyā kiñkorī

vinoda dhariche pāya (8)

Bhaktivinoda, the unworthy servant of Lalitā Sakhī,

                            121
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

tightly holding Your lotus feet close to his heart, begs
to be engaged in Your confidential sevā in the śrī rāsa-
maṇḍala. Please hear my supplication and appoint me as
Your maidservant. (Another meaning of vinoda is “always
giving pleasure to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.”)




Śrī Rūpa-Mañjarī Pada

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



śrī rūpa-mañjarī-pada, sei mora sampada,

sei mora bhajana-pūjana (1)

The lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī are my dearmost
treasure. They are the topmost object of my worship and
inner devotional practices.



sei mora prāṇa-dhana, sei mora ābharaṇa,

sei mora jīvanera jīvana (2)

Her lotus feet are my most cherished wealth, more dear
than my own life. They are the exquisite ornament of my
life, and indeed are the very essence of my existence.



sei mora rasa-nidhi, sei mora vāñchā-siddhi,

sei mora vedera dharama (3)

Her lotus feet are the treasurehouse of rasa. They
bestow the perfection of my desires (precious service to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā – sva-bhakti-śrīyam) and they are the
conclusion of all the Vedas.

sei vrata, sei tapa, sei mora mantra japa,

sei mora dharama karama (4)

Her lotus feet fulfill the goal of my vows and
austerities, my harināma japa, my actions, and my
spiritual practices – all performed with the aim to
please Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī.



anukūla habe vidhi, se-pade hoibe siddhi,

nirakhibo e dui nayane (5)

When Mahāprabhu is pleased with me, then by His mercy I
will attain perfection, and with these two eyes I will
behold Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī’s lotus feet.


                             122
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017



se rūpa-mādhurī-rāśi, prāṇa-kuvalaya-śaśī,

praphullita habe niśi-dine (6)

Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī’s beauty is full of sweetness like the
moon. Just as on a moonlit night the kumuda lotus comes
to full blossom, my heart will fully bloom night and day
in the rays of her moon-like beauty.



tuwā adarśana-ahi, garale jāralo dehī,

ciro-dina tāpita jīvana (7)

Your absence from my vision is like snake poison
spreading throughout my body, gradually consuming my
strength. For the rest of my life my soul will be
burning.



ha ha prabhu! koro doyā, deho more pada-chāyā,

narottama loilo śaraṇa (8)

Narottama dāsa laments, “Alas, Prabhu! O Rūpa Gosvāmī!
Please give me the shade of your lotus feet. There I am
taking shelter.”




Hari Hari, Kabe More Hoibe Sudina

—O Śrī Hari, When Will That Auspicious Day Be Mine?—

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



hari hari, kabe mora hoibe sudina

bhajibo śrī rādhā-kṛṣṇa hoiyā premādhīna (1)

O Hari, Hari, when will that auspicious day be mine
when, overwhelmedwith prema, Iwill serve Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛsṇa?



suyantre miśāiyā gā’bo sumadhura tāna

ānande koribo dûhāra rūpa-guṇa-gāna (2)

I will play a musical instrument and blissfully sing
sweet songs describing Their beautiful forms and
qualities.

‘rādhikā-govinda’ boli’ kāndibo uccaiḥ-svare


                             123
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

bhijibe sakala aṅga nayanera nīre (3)

While singing “Rādhikā-Govinda,” I will weep loudly and
my whole body will become soaked by the tears falling
from my eyes.



ei-bāro koruṇā koro rūpa-sanātana

raghunātha dāsa mora śrī jīva-jīvana (4)

Please be merciful now, Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana
Gosvāmī! O My Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī! My life-giving
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī!



ei-bāro koruṇā koro lalitā viśākhā

sakhya-bhāve śrīdāma-subala-ādi sakhā (5)

O Lalitā and Viśākhā! O Śrīdāma, Subala, and all other
friends in sakhya-bhāva! Please be merciful this time.



sabe mili’ koro doyā puruka mora āśa

prārthanā koroye sadā narottama dāsa (6)

All of you, please be gracious to me. Kindly fulfill my
deepest desires! Narottama dāsa is forever praying in
this way.




Sakhī-Vṛnda Vijñapti – Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Prāṇa Mora

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



rādhā-kṛṣṇa prāṇa mora yugala-kiśora

jīvane maraṇe gati āro nāhi mora (1)

The youthful Divine Couple - Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa - are my
life and soul. In life or death I have no other refuge
but Them.



kālindīra kūle keli-kadambera vana

ratana-vedīra upara bosābo du’jana (2)

In a keli-kadamba forest on the banks of Yamunā I will
seat Yugala-Kiśora on a jeweled throne .




                          124
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

śyāma-gaurī aṅge dibo (cuwā) candanera gandha

cāmara ḍhulābo kabe heribo mukha-candra (3)

I will anoint dark Śyāma and golden Gaurī with
sandalpaste scented with cuwā, and then fan Them with a
cāmara. Oh, when will I behold Their moonlike faces?



gāthiyā mālatīra mālā dibo dõhāra gale

adhare tuliyā dibo karpūra tāmbūle (4)

I will string garlands of malati flowers and place them
around Their necks and then place tāmbūla (betel)
flavored with camphor in Their lotus mouths.



lalitā viśākhā ādi jata sakhī-vṛnda

ājñāya koribo sevā caraṇāravinda (5)

On the order of Lalitā, Viśākhā and the other sakhīs, I
will serve Their lotus feet.



śrī kṛṣṇa-caitanya-prabhura dāsera anudāsa

sevā abhilāṣa kore narottama-dāsa (6)

Narottama dāsa, servant of the servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, yearns for the sevā of Śrī Yugala-
Kiśora.




Kabe Kṛṣṇa-Dhana Pābo

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



kabe kṛṣṇa-dhana pābo, hiyāra mājhāre thabo,

juḍāibo tāpita-parāṇ

sājāiyā dibo hiyā, vāsaibo prāṇa-priyā,

nirakhibo se candra-bayān (1)

When will I gaze on the moonlike face of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
treasure more dear to me than my life? When will I
decorate Him and seat Him in my heart, relieving my
sinful life?



he sajani! kabe mor hoibe su-din


                          125
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

se prāṇa-nāthero saṅge, kabe vā phiribo raṅge,

sukhamoy yamunā-pulin (2)

O my dear friend, when will that auspicious day come
when I will wander in ecstasy with the Lord of my heart
on the banks of Yamunā?



lalitā-viśākhā loyā, tāhāre bheṭibo giyā,

sājāiyā nānā upahār

sadaya hoiyā vidhi, milāibe guṇa-nidhi,

heno bhāgya hoibe āmār (3)

Carrying precious gifts in my hands, I will meet Him
along with Lalitā and Viśākhā. Will kind-hearted
Providence ever allow me the good fortune to meet my
Lord, the ocean of transcendental qualities?



dāruṇo vidhiro nāṭ, bhāṇgilo premero hāṭ,

tila-mātra na rākhilo tā’r

kahe narottama-dās, ki mora jīvane āś,

chāḍi’ gelo vrajendra-kumār (4)

Alas, my fate is that the stringent laws of Providence
have scattered the market-place of prema and not even a
sesame seed is left. Narottama dāsa laments, “What hope
is there for living now that the son of King of Vraja
has left me?”



Vṛṣabhānu-Sutā

Gītā-mala, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



vṛṣabhānu-sutā, caraṇa-sevane, hoibo ye pālya-dāsī

śrī rādhāra sukha, satata sādhane, rohibo āmi prayāsī
(1)

For serving the lotus feet of the daughter of King
Bṛsabhānu, I will become Her maidservant and constantly
strive to bring Her all happiness.



śrī rādhāra sukhe, kṛṣṇera je sukha, jānibo manete āmi

rādhā-pada chāḍi, śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅgame, kabhu nā hoibo kāmī
(2)

I know that Rādhikā’s happiness is Kṛṣṇa’s sole

                             126
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

pleasure, so I will never desire to abandon Her lotus
feet to enjoy separately with Kṛṣṇa.



sakhī-gaṇa mama, parama-suhṛt, yugala-premera guru

tad-anugā ho’ye, sevibo rādhāra, caraṇa-kalapa-taru (3)

The sakhīs are my supreme well-wishers and gurus
regarding the loving affairs of the Divine Couple. Under
their guidance, I will serve Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet
which are like wish-fulfilling trees.



rādhā-pakṣa chāḍi, je jana se jana, je bhāve se bhāve
thāke

āmi to rādhikā-pakṣa pātī sadā, kabhu nāhi heri tā’ke
(4)

I am always in Rādhikā’s entourage and never look upon
the faces of those who leave Her, no matter who they are
or what their mood is.




Dekhite Dekhite


Gītā-mala, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



dekhite dekhite, bhulibo vā kabe, nija-sthūla-paricoya

nayane heribo, braja-pura-śobhā, nitya cid-ānanda-moya
(1)

When will I forget my gross bodily identity behold the
exquisite beauty of Vraja, full of eternal spiritual
bliss and cognizance?



bṛṣabhānu-pure, janama loibo, yāvaṭe vivāha ha’be

braja-gopī-bhāva, hoibe svabhāva, āno bhāva nā rohibe
(2)

I shall take birth in Bṛṣabhānu Mahārāja’s town and will
marry in the nearby village of Yāvaṭa. My sole
disposition and nature will be that of a braja-gopī - no
other idea will remian.



nija-siddha-deho, nija-siddha-nāma, nija-rūpa sva-vasana

rādhā-kṛpā-bale, lobhibo vā kabe, kṛṣṇa-prema-prakaraṇa
(3)

                          127
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


When will I obtain, by the power of Rādhā’s mercy, my
perfected spiritual body, my eternal name and dress
embellishing my real form? And when will I receive
initiation into the techniques of expressing divine love
for Kṛṣṇa?



jamunā-salila-āharaṇe giyā, bujhibo yugala-rasa

prema-mugdha ho’ye, pāgalinī-prāya, gāibo rādhāra yaśa
(4)

As I go to draw water from the Yamunā, I will understand
the confidential mellows of Yugala-Kiśora’s loving
affairs. Being overwhelmed by prema, I will sing Śrī
Rādhikā’s glories just like a madwoman.




Yamunā-Puline

Gītā-mala, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



yamunā-puline, kadamba-kānane, ki herinu sakhī! āja

śyāma vaṁśīdhari, maṇi-mañcopari, kore līlā rasarāja (1)

O sakhī! What did I see today! In a kadamba grove on the
bank of Yamunā, a beautiful blackish boy holding a long
flute was seated on a jeweled throne, performing His
pastimes as rasa-rāja, the monarch of all transcendental
mellows.



kṛṣṇa-keli sudhā-prasravana, aṣṭa-dalopari

śrī rādhā śrī hari, aṣṭa-sakhī parijana (2)

On the eight petals of the jeweled altar were Rādhā and
Hari, surrounded by Their dearmost attendants, the eight
principal gopīs. There Kṛṣṇa was performing His amorous
pastimes which are like a waterfall of nectar.



sugīta-nartane, saba sakhī-gaṇe, tuṣiche yugala-dhane

kṛṣṇa-līlā heri’, prakṛti-sundarī, bistāriche śobhā vane
(3)

With their sweet songs and artful dancing all the gopīs
satisfied the treasured Divine Couple. Thus I beheld
Kṛṣṇa’s līlās with His beautiful beloveds as they roamed
through the splendid forest.




                          128
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

ghare nā jāibo, vane praveśibo, o līlā-rasera tare

tyaji’ kula-lāja, bhaja braja-rāja, vinoda minati kore
(4)

To taste the nectar of these līlās I will not return
home but will enter the forest. Renouncing all family
ties, just worship the Lord of Vraja. This is
Bhaktivinoda’s humble request.




Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Virahe

Gītā-mala, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



śrī kṛṣṇa-virahe, rādhikāra daśā, āmi to’ sahite nāri

yugala-milana, sukhera kāraṇa, jīvana chāḍite pāri (1)

I am absolutely unable to tolerate Śrī Rādhikā’s
pitiable condition when She is suffering in separation
from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but I am fully prepared to immediately
give up my life for the sake of Their happy reunion.



rādhikā-caraṇa, tyajiyā āmāra, kṣaṇeke pralaya hoya

rādhikāra tare, śata-bāra mari, se duḥkha āmār soya (2)

If I were ever to renounce Rādhikā’s lotus feet for even
an instant, I would be totally devastated. For Her sake
I will gladly tolerate the pain and agony of death
hundreds of times.



e heno rādhāra, caraṇa-yugale, paricaryā pābo kabe

hāhā braja-jana, more doyā kori, kabe vraja-vane lobe
(3)

When will I be able to serve Rādhikā’s lotus feet? Alas,
I beg you all, O residents of Vraja, please be merciful
to me now. When will you take me into the forests of
Vraja?



vilāsa mañjarī, anaṅga mañjarī, śrī rūpa mañjarī āra

āmāke tuliyā, loho nija pade, deho more siddhi sāra (4)

O Vilāsa Mañjarī! O Anaṅga Mañjarī! O Rūpa Mañjarī!
Please lift me up and bring me very close to your lotus
feet, thereby bestowing upon me the ultimate perfection.




                          129
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



Pālya-Dāsī Kori’

Gītā-mala, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



pālya-dāsī kori’, lalitā sundarī, āmāre loiyā kabe

śrī-rādhikā-pade, kāle milāibe, ajña-sevā samarpibe (1)

When will beautiful Lalitā foster me as her aspiring
maidservant? Then later she will offer me up unto the
lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā, and will place me entirely at
Her disposal for rendering various services according to
Her order.



śrī rūpa mañjarī, saṅge jābo kabe, rasa-sevā-śikṣā-tare

tad-anugā ho’ye, rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭe, rohibo harṣitāntare
(2)

When will Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī take me with her to the banks
of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa to learn rasa-sevā, how to stimulate
romantic moods? I will live there under her guidance,
and pass my time feeling great delight within my heart.



śrī-viśākhā-pade, saṅgīta śikhibo, kṛṣṇa-līlā rasamoy

śrī rati mañjarī, śrī rasa mañjarī, hoibe sabe sadoy (3)

At the lotus feet of Śrī Viśākhā I will learn music and
songs which are all abounding in the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes. All of the other sakhīs in our group,
including Śrī Rati Mañjarī and Śrī Rasa Mañjarī, will
also deal most affectionately with me.



parama ānande, sakale miliyā, rādhikā caraṇe rabo

ei parākāṣṭa, siddhi kabe habe, pābo rādhā-padāsaba (4)

Feeling supreme bliss we will all meet together and stay
at the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā. When, O when will I
achieve this topmost perfection, whereby I will receive
the intoxicating honey flowing from the lotus feet of
Śrī Rādhā?




Hari Hari! Kabe Heno Daśā Ha’be Mora

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura




                          130
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

hari hari! kabe heno daśā ha’be mora

sevibo duhāra pada ānande vibhora (1)

O Hare! Hari! When will I have the fortune to serve the
lotus feet of the Divine Couple, being completely
overwhelmed with joy?



bhramara hoiyā sadā rohibo caraṇe

śrī-caraṇāmṛta sadā koribo āsvādane (2)

Like a bumblebee, I will always remain at Their lotus
feet and drink nectar.



ei āśā kori āmi-jata sakhī-gaṇa

tomāder kṛpāya hoya vāñchita pūraṇa (3)

This is my only hope: O my dear sakhīs, only by the
mercy of all of you can my desire be fulfilled.



bahu-dina vāñchā kori’ pūrṇa jāte hoya

sabe mili’ doyā koro hoiyā sadoya (4)

I have desired this for a very long time. Therefore,
being kind-hearted, please have mercy on me and fulfill
my request.



sevā-āśe narottama kānde divā-niśi

kṛpā kori’ koro more anugata-dāsī (5)

Narottama dāsa weeps day and night for want of
devotional service, so please make me Your obedient and
faithful maidservant.




Cintāmaṇi-Moy


Gītā-mala, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



cintāmaṇi-moy, rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭa,

tāhe kuñja śata śata

prabala vidruma-moya taru-latā,

muktā-phale abanata (1)

                          131
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


The banks of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa are made of billions of
conscious, ecstatic desire-fulfilling touchstones, and
surrounding the lake are hundreds and hundreds of
beautiful transcendental gardens and kuñjas. All the
trees and creepers in those gardens are made of coral
and rubies, and the fruits they produce are diamonds and
pearls. And their branches are bending down to the
ground due to being overburdened with millions of these
lovely gems.



svānanda-sukhada, kuñja manohar,

tāhāte kuṭira śobhe

vasiyā tathāy, gābo kṛṣṇa-nām,

kabe kṛṣṇa-dāsya lobhe (2)

My small cottage is shining beautifully within that most
enchanting garden called Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja. Living
there, I will sing Kṛṣṇa’s holy name, and I will
anxiously await that time when I will get to serve Him
and His associates.



emona samoy muralīra gān,

pasibe e dāsī-kāne

ānande mātibo, sakala bhulibo,

śrī-kṛṣṇa-vaṁśīra gāne (3)

Absorbed in that way, the songs of a transcendental
flute will suddenly enter this maidservant’s ear.
Becoming madly excited by such a sound, I will forget
everything and will only listen spellbound to those
wonderful songs of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute.



rādhe rādhe boli’, muralī ḍākibe,

madīya īśwarī nāma

śuniyā camaki’, uṭhibe e dāsī,

kemona koribe prāṇa (4)

The low, deep vibration of His long muralī will call
out, “Rādhe... Rādhe...” – the very name of my only
worshipable Mistress! Startled with wonder by hearing
that sound, this maidservant will then quickly jump up
with an anxious heart, wondering what to do next.




Hari Hari! Kabe Habo Vṛndāvana-Vāsī

                             132
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



hari hari! kabe habo vṛndāvana-vāsī

nirakhibo nayane yugala-rūpa-rāśi (1)

O Śrī Hari! When will I be able to live in Vṛndāvana?
When will my eyes behold the beautiful radiant forms of
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala?



tyājiyā śayana-sukha vicitra pālaṅka

kabe vrajera dhūlāya dhūsara habe aṅga (2)

Giving up the happiness of sleeping in a wonderful,
luxurious bed, when will my body be colored grey from
sleeping in the dust of Vraja?



ṣaḍ-rasa bhojana dūre parihari

kabe vraje māgiyā khāibo mādhukarī (3)

Giving up all desire to taste the six flavors of
delicious food [sweet, sour, salty, pungent, bitter, and
astringent], when will I do mādhukarī in Vraja, begging
small amounts of foodstuffs from house to house?



parikramā koriyā beḍābo bane-bane

viśrāma koribo jāi yamunā-pūline (4)

Doing parikramā of the holy places, I will roam from
forest to forest, and then I will rid myself of all
fatigue by taking rest on the banks of the Yamunā.



tāpa dūra koribo śītala vaṁśī-vaṭe

(kabe) kuñje baiṭhaba hāma vaiṣṇava-nikaṭe (5)

When will I find relief from the mid-day sun under the
cooling shade of Vaṁśī-Vaṭa? When will I sit in a kuñja
amidst the Vaiṣṇavas (who will instruct me in bhajana
and reveal to me the līlās of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava)?



narottama dāsa kohe kori’ parihāra

kabe vā emona daśā hoibe āmāra (6)

Narottama dāsa says, “When, oh when will I give up
everything else, when will I attain this stage (and be
able to have darśana of Their love-filled pastimes)?

                          133
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017




Vṛndāvana Ramya-Sthāna

Śrīla Narottama Das Ṭhakura



vṛndāvana ramya-sthāna, divya cintāmaṇi-dhāma,

ratana-mandira manohara

āvṛta kālindī nīre, rāja-haṁsa keli kore,

tāhe śobhe kanaka-kamala (1)

The beautiful place known as Vṛndāvana is composed
entirely of divine touchstones, and is filled with many
enchanting temples bedecked with costly jewels. Regal
swans frolic in the waters of the Yamunā, which
surrounds that transcendental island. In the midst of
her waters is a splendid golden lotus of a hundred
petals.



tāra madhye hema-pīṭha, aṣṭa-dale veṣṭita,

aṣṭa-dale pradhānā nāyikā

tāra madhye ratnāsane, bosi’ āchen dui-jane,

śyāma-saṅge sundarī rādhikā (2)

In the whorl of that lotus is a golden platform
surrounded by eight petals. Situated upon those eight
petals are the principal sakhīs, headed by Lalitā and
Viśākhā. In the center Śyāma sits with the beautiful
Rādhikā upon a jeweled throne.



o rūpa-lāvaṇya-rāśi, amiya poḍiche khasi’,

hāsya-parihāsa-sambhāṣaṇe

narottama-dāsa koya, nitya-līlā sukha-moya,

sadāi sphuruka mora mane (3)

Waves of Their beauty and sweetness are showering nectar
in the form of Their talks, which are filled with a
flood of laughing and joking. Narottama dāsa says, “May
these eternal pastimes overflowing with transcendental
joy be ever manifest in my heart.”




Hari Bolibo Ār Madan-Mohan

                             134
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhakura



hari bolibo ār madan-mohan heribo go

ei rūpe vrajer pathe calibo go (1)

When will I chant the names of Hari and see Madana
Mohana? In this way I will travel the path to Vraja.



jāba go vrajendra-pur, ha’ba gopīkār nūpur,

tādera caraṇe madhur-madhur bājibo go

vipine vinoda khelā, saṅgete rākhāler melā,

tādera caraṇer dhūlā mākhibo go (2)

Entering Vraja, I will become an ankle-bell on the feet
of the gopīs and make a sweet tinkling sound. I will
watch the cowherd boys as they joyfully play in the
forest of Vṛndāvana and smear the dust from their feet
on my body.



rādhā-kṛṣṇer rūpa mādhurī, heribo du nayana bhori,

nikuñjera dwārī dwārī rohibo go

tomarā saba vrajavāsī, purāo manera abhilāṣi,

kabe śrī-kṛṣṇera vaṁśī śunibo go (3)

I will gaze upon Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's sweet beauty to my
eyes’ satisfaction and I will stand guard at the gate of
the nikuñja. O residents of Vraja! Please fulfill my
desires and allow me to hear the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s
flute.



ei deha antima kāle, rākhibo śrī-yamunāra jale,

jaya rādhā govinda bole bhāsibo go

kohe narottama dāsa, nā pūrilo abhilāṣa,

kabe hāma vraja-vāsa koribo go (4)

At the time of giving up my body, I will simply place it
in the waters of the Yamunā and float while chanting,
“Jaya Rādhā Govinda.” Narottama dāsa laments, “My
desires have not been fulfilled. Oh, when will I reside
in Vraja?”




                          135
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Rādhā-Kuṇḍa-Taṭa

—On the Banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa—

Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭa-kuñja-kuṭīra

govardhana-parvata, yamunā-tīra (1)

A vine-covered bower on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa,
Govardhana Hill, the banks of the Yamunā...



kusuma-sarovara, mānasa-gaṅgā

kalinda-nandinī vipula-taraṅgā (2)

Kusuma-sarovara, Mānasa-gaṅgā, the daughter of the
Kalinda Mountain (Yamunā) with her expansive waves...



vaṁśī-vaṭa, gokula, dhīra-samīra

vṛndāvana-taru-latikā-bānīra (3)

Vaṁśī-Vaṭa, Gokula, Dhīra-samīra, the trees, creepers,
and groves of Vṛndāvana...



khaga-mṛga-kula, malaya-bātāsa

mayūra, bhramara, muralī-vilāsa (4)

...the different varieties of colorful birds, deer, the
cool and fragrant breezes from the Malaya Mountains, the
peacocks, bumblebees, the pastimes with the flute...



veṇu, śṛṅga, pada-cihna, megha-mālā

vasanta, śaśāṅka, śaṅkha, karatālā (5)

...the flute itself, the forest bugle, the footprints in
the dust, the banks of blackish clouds, springtime, the
moon, the conchshell and karatālās...



yugala-vilāse anukūla jāni

līlā-vilāsa-uddīpaka māni (6)

I know all these elements are very conducive for Śrī
Rādhā’s and Kṛṣṇa’ṣ loving exchanges, and thus I
consider them as uddīpaka, stimuli, for the bhakta’s
entrance into Their līlā-vilāsa.


                             136
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



e saba choḍata kāhi nāhi jāu

e saba choḍata parāṇa hārāu (7)

I refuse to go anywhere if these uddīpaka are not there,
for to abandon all these is to give up life itself.



bhakativinoda kahe, śuno kāna

tuwā uddīpaka hāmārā parāṇa (8)

Bhaktivinoda says, “Hear me, O Kāna, Your uddīpaka
(which stimulate remembrance of You) are my very life
and soul.”




Śrī Vraja-Dhāma-Mahimāmṛta

—The Nectarean Glories of Vraja-dhāma—



jaya rādhe, jaya kṛṣṇa, jaya vṛndāvana,

śrī-govinda, gopīnātha, madana-mohan (1)

All glories to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the divine forest
of Śrī Vṛndāvana. All glories to the three presiding
Deities of Vṛndāvana – Śrī Govinda, Gopīnātha, and
Madana-Mohana.

śyāma-kuṇḍa, rādhā-kuṇḍa, giri-govardhana

kālindī jamunā jaya, jaya mahāvan (2)

All glories to Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Govardhana
Hill, and the Yamunā River (Kālindī). All glories to the
great forest known as Mahāvana, where Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma
displayed all of Their childhood pastimes.



keśī-ghāṭa, baṁśī-baṭa, dwādaśa-kānan

jāhā saba līlā koilo śrī-nanda-nandan (3)

All glories to Keśī-Ghāṭa, where Kṛṣṇa killed the Keśī
demon. All glories to the Vaṁśi-Vaṭa tree, where Kṛṣṇa
attracted all the gopīs to come by playing His flute.
Glories to all of the twelve forests of Vraja. At these
places the son of Nanda, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, performed all of His
pastimes.



śri-nanda-jaśodā jaya, jaya gopa-gaṇ


                             137
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

śrīdāmādi jaya, jaya dhenu-vatsa-gaṇ (4)

All glories to Kṛṣṇa’s divine father and mother, Nanda
and Yaśodā. All glories to the cowherd boys, headed by
Śrīdāma, the older brother of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and
Anaṅga Mañjarī. All glories to the cows and calves of
Vraja.



jaya bṛṣabhānu, jaya kīrtidā sundarī

jaya jaya paurṇamāsī, ābhīra-nāgarī (5)

All glories to Rādhā’s divine father and mother,
Vṛṣabhānu and the beautiful Kīrtidā. All glories to
Paurṇamāsī, the guru of the cowherd community. (She is
the mother of Sāṅdīpani Muni, grandmother of
Madhumaṅgala and Nāndī-mukhī, and the beloved disciple
of Devarṣi Nārada.)



jaya jaya gopīśvara vṛndāvana-mājh

jaya jaya kṛṣṇa-sakhā baṭu dwija-rāja (6)

All glories, all glories to Gopīśvara Śiva, who resides
in Vṛndāvana in order to protect the holy dhāma. All
glories, all glories to Kṛṣṇa’s (funny) young brāhmaṇa
friend, Madhumaṅgala.



jaya rāma-ghāṭa, jaya rohiṇī-nandana

jaya jaya vṛndāvana-bāsī jata jana (7)

All glories to Rāma-ghāṭa, where Baladeva peformed His
rāsa dance. All glories to Balarāma, the son of Rohiṇī.
All glories, all glories to all the residents of
Vṛndāvana.



jaya dwija-patnī, jaya nāga-kanyā-gaṇa

bhaktite jāhārā pāilo govinda-caraṇa (8)

All glories to the wives of the proud Vedic brāhmaṇas.
All glories to the wives of the Kālīya serpent. Through
pure devotion they all obtained the lotus feet of
Govinda.



śrī-rāsa-maṇḍala jaya jaya rādhā-śyāma

jaya jaya rāsa-līlā sarva-manorama (9)

All glories to the place where the rāsa-līlā was
performed. All glories to Rādhā and Śyāma. All glories,
all glories to the divine rāsa dance, which is the most
beautiful of all of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

                          138
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




jaya jayojjwala-rasa sarva-rasa-sāra

parakīyā-bhāve jāhā brajete pracāra (10)

All glories, all glories to śṛṅgāra rasa, which is the
essence and most excellent of all rasas and is
propagated in Vraja as parakīyā-bhāva.



śrī-jāhnavā-pāda-padma koriyā smaraṇa

dīna kṛṣṇa-dāsa kohe nāma-saṅkīrtana (11)

Remembering the lotus feet of Nityānanda Prabhu’s
consort, Śrī Jāhnavā Devī, this very fallen and lowly
servant of Kṛṣṇa sings the saṅkīrtana of the holy name.




Jaya Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Gīti



jaya rādhā-mādhava rādhā-mādhava rādhe

jayadever prāṇa-dhana he (1)

All glories to Rādhā and Mādhava, the treasure of
Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s heart!



jaya rādhā-madana-gopāl rādhā-madana-gopāl rādhe

sītā-nāther prāṇa-dhana he (2)

All glories to Rādhā and Madana-gopāla, the treasure of
Śrī Advaita Ācārya’s heart!



jaya rādhā-govinda rādhā-govinda rādhe

rūpa gosvāmīr prāṇa-dhana he (3)

All glories to Rādhā and Govinda, the treasure of Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s heart!



jaya rādhā-madana-mohan rādhā-madana-mohan rādhe

sanātaner prāṇa-dhana he (4)

All glories to Rādhā and Madana-mohana, the treasure of
Sanātana Gosvāmī’s heart!



                          139
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


jaya rādhā-gopīnātha rādhā-gopīnātha rādhe

madhu paṇḍiter prāṇa-dhana he (5)

All glories to Rādhā and Gopīnātha, the treasure of
Maḍhu Paṇḍita’s heart!



jaya rādhā-dāmodara rādhā-dāmodara rādhe

jīv gosvāmīr prāṇa-dhana he (6)

All glories to Rādhā and Dāmodara, the treasure of Jīva
Gosvāmī’s heart!



jaya rādhā-ramaṇa rādhā-ramaṇa rādhe

gopāl bhaṭṭer prāṇa-dhana he (7)

All glories to Rādhā-ramaṇa, the treasure of Gopāla
Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s heart!



jaya rādhā-vinoda rādhā-vinoda rādhe

lokanāther prāṇa-dhana he (8)

All glories to Rādhā-vinoda, the treasure of Lokanātha
Gosvāmī’s heart!



jaya rādhā-gokulānanda rādhā-gokulānanda rādhe

viśvanāther prāṇa-dhana he (9)

All glories to Rādhā and Gokulānanda, the treasure of
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s heart!



jaya rādhā-giridhārī rādhā-giridhārī rādhe

dās gosvāmīr prāṇa-dhana he (10)

All glories to Rādhā and Giridhārī, the treasure of
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s heart!



jaya rādhā-śyāmasundar rādhā-śyāmasundar rādhe

śyāmānander prāṇa-dhana he (11)

All glories to Rādhā and Śyāmasundara, the treasure of
Śyāmānanda Gosvāmī’s heart!




                          140
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

jaya rādhā-kānta rādhā-kānta rādhe

vakreśvarer prāṇa-dhana he (12)

All glories to Rādhā-kānta, the treasure of Vakreśvara
Paṇḍita’s heart!



jaya gāndharvikā-giridhārī gāndharvikā-giridhārī rādhe

sarasvatīr prāṇa-dhana he (13)

All glories to Gāndharvikā and Giridhārī, the treasure
of Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s heart!



jaya rādhā-vinoda-bihārī rādhā-vinoda-bihārī rādhe

keśava gosvāmīr prāṇa-dhana he (14)

All glories to Rādhā and Vinoda-Bihārī, the treasure of
Śrī Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī’s heart!




Tuhó Se Rohili Madhupūra

Śrīla Govinda dāsa Kavirāja



tuhó se rohili madhupūra

vrajakūla akūla dukūla kalarava

kānu kānu kari jhura (1)

O Kṛṣṇa-candra, now You are staying very far away in
Madhupūri, in Mathurā. But what is the condition of
Vṛndāvana? All the Vrajabāsīs, in great pain and
distress of separation, are calling, “Kānu (Kṛṣṇa),
Kānu! Where are You?” Even the birds are calling. But
there is no answer, only an echo. All are weeping and
are about to die.



yaśomatī-nanda andha sama baithai

sahase uthāi nā para

sakha-gaṇa dhenu veṇurava nā suniye

vicchurala nagara bajara (2)

Yaśodā Maiyā and Nanda Bābā are crying so much that it
is as if they have become blind and cannot see any more.
They are only sitting and crying. They have no strength
and are like skeletons, unable to even stand up. They
are about to die because they are not cooking. For whom

                           141
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

will they cook? And all the cows and Your friends –
where are they? Because they cannot hear You calling
them on Your flute, the marketplaces and the roads are
all deserted – no one is there!



kusuma tyajiya ali kṣititale lutaṭa

taru-gaṇa malina samana

mayuri nā nacata kapoti na bolata

kokila na karatahi gaṇa (3)

Even the bumblebees, which were so busy collecting
honey, are now so upset they have left the flowers. They
are crying and rolling on the ground in the pain of
separation. All the trees look so drab and distressed.
The peacocks are no longer dancing, the pigeons are no
longer singing, and the cuckoos are silent – they are
not calling, “Koohoo, koohoo,” any more. All are feeling
so much pain of separation.



virahinī rāi virahajvare jara jara

caudike viraha hutasa

sahaje yamunā jala āgi samana bhela

kahatahi govinda dāsa (4)

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is burning up in the fever of
separation. In all directions, everyone is sinking in
the ocean of separation from You. Even the Yamunā, whose
waters are now made of the tears coming from the gopīs,
does not flow anymore. This is the condition of
Vṛndāvana! Govinda dāsa tells this sad story.




Ṣaḍ-Aṅga Śaraṇāgati

Śrī-Kṛṣṇa-Caitanya Prabhu Jīve Doyā Kori’

—Six-fold Unconditional Surrender—

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya prabhu jīve doyā kori’

sva-pārṣada svīya dhāma saha avatārī’ (1)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Prabhu, being merciful to all the
living beings, descended with His own divine abode and
personal associates.



                             142
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


atyanta durlabha prema koribāre dāna

śikhāya śaraṇāgati bhakatera prāṇa (2)

To bestow freely that rarest treasure prema-bhakti,
spontaneous love, He taught śaraṇāgati, the life and
soul of the devotees:



dainya, ātma-nivedana, goptṛtve varaṇa

‘avaśya rakṣibe kṛṣṇa’—viśvāsa-pālana (3)

Humility, self-dedication, accepting Him as one’s only
maintainer and guardian, having complete conviction that
Kṛṣṇa will surely protect us;



bhakti-anukūla-mātra kāryera svīkāra

bhakti-pratikūla-bhāva-varjanāṅgīkāra (4)

Accepting things favorable for devotional service, and
rejecting the unfavorable.



ṣaḍ-aṅga śaraṇāgati hoibe jāhāra

tāhāra prārthanā śune śrī nanda-kumāra (5)

The prayers of one who submits unconditionally to this
six-fold surrender are heard by Śrī Nanda-kumāra.



rūpa-sanātana-pade dante tṛṇa kori’

bhakativinoda paḍe duhó pada dhori’ (6)

With a straw in his teeth Bhaktivinoda prostrates before
Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs, embracing the lotus feet
of both.



kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā bole—“āmi to’ adhama

śikhāye śaraṇāgati koro he uttama” (7)

Lamenting, he cries out, “I am so low and fallen! Teach
me unconditional surrender and make me a first-class
Vaiṣṇava!”




Ātma-Nivedana



                          143
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



ātma-nivedana, tuwā pade kori’, hoinu parama sukhī

duḥkha dūre gelo, cintā nā rohilo, caudike ānanda dekhī
(1)

O My Lord, since I have surrendered my soul permanently
at Your lotus feet, I have become supremely joyful. All
my sufferings and sorrows have gone far away, and no
more anxieties remain in my mind. I see only bliss
everywhere in all four directions.



aśoka-abhoya, amṛta-ādhāra, tomāra caraṇa-dvaya

tāhāte ekhona, viṣrāma labhiyā chāḍinu bhavera bhoya (2)

Your lotus feet are reservoirs of immortal nectar where
one may live free from lamentation and fear. I have
found peace there now and have given up the fear of
worldly existence.



tomāra saṁsāre, koribo sevana, nahibo phalera bhāgī

tava sukha jāhe, koribo jatana, ho’ye pade anurāgī (3)

I am the servant in Your house, working diligently
without attachment to enjoying the fruits of my labor.
Everything I do is only for Your pleasure and thus I am
always enchanted by remembering Your lotus feet.



tomāra sevāya, duḥkha hoya jato, seo to’ parama sukha

sevā-sukha-duḥkha, parama sampada, nāśaye avidyā-duḥkha
(4)

Whatever problems come to me in the course of rendering
service to You I accept as the highest pleasure, for in
the course of Your service happiness and distress are
equally great riches. Both destroy the misery of
ignorance.



pūrva itihāsa, bhulinu sakala, sevā-sukha pe’ye mane

āmi to’ tomāra, tumi to’ āmāra, ki kāja apara dhane (5)

Since I have become absorbed in happily serving You, I
have completely forgotten all my past history. All I
know is that I am Yours, and You are mine. What else is
of any value?



bhakativinoda, ānande ḍubiyā, tomāra sevāra tare

                          144
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


saba ceṣṭa kore, taba icchā-mato, thākiyā tomāra ghare
(6)

Bhaktivinoda, sinking in an ocean of nectar, says, “All
of my endeavors are completely mixed with Your desires
and are directed to You only now that I am a resident in
Your house.”




Āmāra Jīvana


—My Life—

Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



āmāra jīvana sadā pāpe rata,

nāhiko puṇyera leśa

parere udvega diyāchi je kato

diyāchi jīvere kleśa (1)

Throughout my whole life I have been addicted to sin,
never performing any pious activities. I have simply
been a source of disturbance and suffering for others.



nija sukha lāgi’ pāpe nāhi ḍori’

doyā-hīna svārtha-paro

para sukhe duḥkhī, sadā mithyā-bhāṣī

para-duḥkha sukha koro (2)

For my own pleasure I never fear to commit any sin. I am
devoid of pity and full of selfishness; I’m sorry at
others’ happiness and am an inveterate liar. Indeed, I
take delight in others’ miseries.



aśeṣa kāmanā, hṛdi mājhe mora,

krodhī dambha-parāyaṇa

mada-matta sadā viṣaye mohita,

hiṁsā-garva vibhūṣaṇa (3)

Endless are the selfish desires in my heart. I am prone
to anger and devoted to arrogance. Intoxicated by
conceit and deluded by attraction to sense pleasure, I
ornament myself with pride and envy.


                             145
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



nidrālasya-hata, sukārye virata,

akārye udyogī āmi

pratiṣṭhā lāgiyā, śāṭhya-ācaraṇa,

lobha-hata sadā kāmī (4)

Afflicted by laziness and sleep, adverse to pious
activities, I delight to perform any harmful act to
obtain name and fame. I am very adept in duplicity,
always lusty and degraded by mundane greed.



e heno durjana, sajjana-varjita,

aparādhī nirantara

śubha-kārya-śūnya, sadānartha-manāḥ

nānā duḥkhe jara jara (5)

Being such a miscreant and rejected by saintly persons,
I have become a repeated offender. I never do good deeds
but am inclined only to bad habits. Thus, I am oppressed
by so many miseries.



vārddhakye ekhona upāya vihīna,

tā’te dīna akiñcana

bhakativinoda, prabhura caraṇe,

kore duḥkha nivedana (6)

Now in old age I am rendered helpless, reduced to a
fallen and destitute condition. Bhaktivinoda presents
his sad case at the feet of the Lord.




Bhuliyā Tomāre


Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



bhuliyā tomāre, saṁsāre āsiyā,

peye nānā-vidha byathā

tomāra caraṇe, āsiyāchi āmi,

bolibo duḥkehera kathā (1)

O Lord, forgetting You and coming to this material

                             146
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

world, I have experienced a host of sins and sorrows.
Now I approach Your lotus feet and submit my tale of
woe.



jananī jaṭhare, chilāma jakhona,

biṣama bandhana-pāśe

eka-bāra prabhu! dekhā diyā more,

vañcile e dīna dāse (2)

While I was bound up tightly in the unbearable confines
of my mother’s womb, O Lord, You once revealed Yourself
before me. After appearing briefly, You abandoned this
poor servant of Yours.



takhono bhāvinu, janama pāiyā,

koribo bhajana tava

janama hoilo, paḍi’ māyā-jāle,

nā hoilo jñāna-lava (3)

At that moment I thought, “After my birth this time, I
will surely worship You with undivided attention.” But
alas, after taking birth I fell into the entangling
network of worldly illusions; thus I possessed not even
a drop of true knowledge.



ādarera chele, sva-janera kole,

hāsiyā kāṭānu kāla

janaka jananī-snehete bhuliyā,

saṁsāra lāgilo bhālo (4)

As a dear son fondled in the laps of attentive
relatives, I passed my time smiling and laughing. The
affection of my father and mother helped me forget You
still more, and I began to think that the material world
was a very nice place.



krame dina dina, bālaka hoiyā,

bhelinu bālaka-saha

āra kichu dine, jnāna upajilo,

pāṭha poḍi ahar-ahaḥ (5)

Day by day I gradually grew into a young boy and began
playing with other boys. Soon my powers of understanding
emerged, so I diligently studied my school lessons every

                           147
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

day.



vidyāra gaurave, bhrami’ deśe deśe,

dhana uparjana kori

sva-jana pālana, kori eka-mane,

bhulinu tomāre, hari! (6)

Proud of my accomplished education, I later traveled
from place to place and earned much wealth. Thereby
maintaining my family with undivided attention, I forgot
You, O Lord Hari!



bārdhakye ekhona, bhakativinoda,

kāṅdiyā kātara ati

nā bhajiyā tore, dina bṛthā gelo,

ekhona ki have gati? (7)

Now in old age, this Bhaktivinoda very sadly weeps as
death approaches. I failed to worship You, O Lord, and
instead passed my days in vain. What will be my fate
now?




Emona Durmati


Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



(prabhu he!) emona durmati, saṁsāra-bhitore, poḍiyā
āchinu āmi

taba nija-jana, kono mahājane, pāṭhāiyā dile tumi (1)

I am so unfortunate that I have fallen into this
material world, O Lord, but one of Your pure and
elevated devotees has come to deliver me.



doyā kori’ more, patita dekhiyā, kohilo āmāre giyā

ohe dīna-jana, śuno bhālo kathā, ullasita ha’be hiyā (2)

Seeing me so fallen and wretched, he took pity on me,
saying, “O humbled soul, listen to this good news which
will gladden your heart.




                            148
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

tomāre tārite, śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya, nabadwīpe abatāra

tomā heno kato, dīna hīna jane, korilena bhava-pāra (3)

“Just to deliver you Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya has appeared in
the land of Navadvīpa. He has already safely conducted
so many other sad and suffering souls across the ocean
of birth and death.



bedera pratijñā, rākhibāro tore, rukma-barṇa bipra-suta

mahāprabhu nāme, nadīyā mātāya, saṅge bhāi abadhūta (4)

“Fulfilling the promise of the Vedas, the son of a
brāhmaṇa, bearing the name Mahāprabhu and of golden
complexion, has descended with His brother, the avadhūta
Nityānanda. Together They have maddened all of Nadīyā
with divine ecstasy.



nanda-suta jini, caitanya gosÃi, nija-nāma kori’ dāna

tārilo jagat, tumi-o jāiyā, loho nija-paritrāṇa (5)

“Śrī Caitanya, who is directly Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda,
has saved the world by freely distributing His own holy
name. Go also and claim your deliverance.”



se kathā suniyā, āsiyāchi, nātha! tomāra caraṇa-tale

bhakativinoda, kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā, āpana-kāhinī bole (6)

O Lord, hearing those words, Bhaktivinoda has come to
Your lotus feet and amidst profuse tears relates the
story of his life.




Āmi to’ Durjana


Kalyāna Kalpa-taru - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



āmi to’ durjana ati sadā durācāra

koṭi koṭi janme mora nāhiko uddhāra (1)

I am certainly the most wicked person, always performing
sinful actions. For millions and millions of births I
have not been able to gain release from this
predicament.



e heno doyālu kebā e jagate āche

                          149
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


e mata pāmare uddhāriyā la’be kāche (2)

Who in this material universe is so merciful as to pick
such a sinner up and bring me close to Himself?



śuniyāchi, śrī-caitanya patita-pāvana

ananta-pātakī jane korilā mocana (3)

But I have heard about Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is
delivering the most fallen. He has already freed
innumerable sinners.



e mata doyāra sindhu kṛpā bitariyā

kabe uddhāribe more śrī-caraṇa diyā? (4)

Such an ocean of compassion He is, distributing His
causeless mercy! When will He deliver me by directly
bestowing upon me His venerable lotus feet?



ei-bāra bujhā jā’be karuṇā tomāra

yadi e pāmara-jane koribe uddhāra (5)

O Lord! If You now deliver a person as sinful as myself,
the extent of Your compassion will really be understood.



karma nāi, jñāna nāi, kṛṣṇa-bhakti nāi

tabe bolo’ ki-rūpe o śrī-caraṇa pāi (6)

I have no good deeds to my credit, I am bereft of
knowledge and I possess no bhakti for Kṛṣṇa. So how will
I attain those lotus feet?



bharasā āmāra mātra karuṇā tomāra

ahaitukī se karuṇā vedera vicāra (7)

My only hope is Your compassion, for all the Vedas say
that Your mercy is causeless.



tumi to’ pavitra-pada, āmi durāśaya

kemone tomāra pade pāibo āśraya? (8)

You are the very abode of purity, and I am most wicked
and evil-minded. So how will I receive the shelter of
Your lotus feet?


                          150
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017



kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā bole’ e patita chāra

patita-pāvana nāma prasiddha tomāra (9)

Bitterly weeping, this fallen and most contemptible
person says, “Dear Lord, all I know is that You are
celebrated as Patita-Pāvana, the deliverer of the
fallen.”




Ei Ghora Saṁsāre


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



ei ghora saṁsāre, paḍiya mānava, nā pāya duḥkhera śeṣa

sādhu-saṅgo kori, hari bhaje yadi, tabe anta hoya kleśa
(1)

Having fallen into this dreadful material world, the
living being finds no end to his miseries. If he takes
sadhu-saṅga and serves Hari, his sufferings will finish.



saṁsāra-anale, jvaliche hṛdoya, anale bāḍaye anala

aparādha chādi, laya kṛṣṇa-nāma, anale paḍaye jala (2)

His heart is burning in the fire of the material
existence – a fire which keeps on increasing. Taking up
kṛṣṇa-nāma while avoiding offenses is the water to
extinguish the fire.



nitāi-caitanya, caraṇa-kamale, āśraya loilo yei

kṛṣṇa-dāsa bole, jīvana-marane, āmāra āśraya sei (3)

Kṛṣṇa-dāsa says, “The person who has taken the shelter
of the lotus feet of Nitāi-Caitanya is my refuge in life
and death.”




Viṣaya-Vāsanā-Rūpa

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhakura



viṣaya-vāsanā-rūpa cittera vikāra


                             151
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

āmāra hṛdoye bhoga kore anibāra (1)

The delusion rooted deeply in my heart has taken the
shape of desires for sense gratification. Thus in my
heart I am constantly trying to enjoy.



je kota jatana āmi korilama hāya

nā gelo vikāra bujhi śeṣe prāṇa jāya (2)

Alas! How much endeavor have I made for such enjoyment?
My delusions have not gone away, and I understand that
now in my last days my life is departing.



e ghora vikāra more korilo asthira

śānti nā pāilo sthāna, antara adhīra (3)

This ghastly delusion has made me extremely restless. I
have not achieved any peace, and I am most disturbed at
heart.



śrī rūpa goswāmī more kṛpā vitariyā

uddhāribe kabe yukta-vairāgya arpiyā (4)

When will Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī bestow his mercy upon me?
When will he deliver me by imparting knowledge of yukta-
vairāgya (renunciation which dovetails using all
favorable things in devotional service)?

kabe sanātana more chāḍāye viṣaya

nityānande samarpibe haiyā sadoya (5)

When will Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī induce me to give up
this materialistic sense gratification? Being gracious
to me, he will offer me in devotion to Nityānanda
Prabhu.



śrī jīva goswāmī kabe siddhānta-salile

nivāibe tarkānala, citta jāhe jwale (6)

When will Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī douse me with the waters of
his strong conclusive truths and thereby extinguish the
fire of false arguments that burns my heart?



śrī-caitanya-nāma sune udibe pulaka

rādhā-kṛṣṇāmṛta-pāne haibo aśoka (7)

My jubilation will arise when I hear the chanting of the
holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, and by drinking the

                          152
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

nectar of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa I will become free from all
lamentation.



kāṅgālera su-kāṅgāla durjana e jana

vaiṣṇava-caraṇāśraya yāce akiñcana (8)

This rogue is not only the most wicked amongst the
wicked, but is the most wretched amongst the wretched.
Therefore he now begs for the shelter of the lotus feet
of all the Vaiṣṇavas.




Āmāra Samāna Hīna


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhakura



āmāra samāna hīna nāhi e saṁsāre

asthira ha’yechi poḍi’ bhava pārābāre (1)

The likes of such a lowly soul as me is not to be found
anywhere in this world. Thus I have become most agitated
due to falling into this vast ocean of material
existence.



kuladevī yogamāyā more kṛpā kori’

āvaraṇa sambaribe kabe viśwodarī (2)

O Yogamāyā! When will you show mercy to me by lifting up
the curtain of illusion with which you cover the
universe in your external form of Mahāmāyā? You are
known as Kula-devī, the traditional worshipable goddess
of all the Vaiṣṇavas dynasties.



śunechi āgame-vede mahimā tomāra

śrī-kṛṣṇa-vimukhe bāṅdhi’ karāo saṁsāra (3)

I have heard of your glories and activities from the
Vedic literatures. You take all those souls who are
averse to Kṛṣṇa and bind them within the material world.



śrī-kṛṣṇa-sāmmukhya jā’ra bhāgya-krame hoya

tā’re mukti diyā koro aśoka abhaya (4)

To that person whose good fortune gradually dawns,
allowing him to again become favorably disposed to

                             153
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa, you award liberation and make him free from all
grief and fear.



e dāse janani! kori’ akaitava doyā

vṛndāvane deha sthāna tumi yogamāyā (5)

Oh my dear Mother! Showing your causeless mercy to this
servant, give me a place in Vṛndāvana, for you are
Yogamāyā Herself (the internal energy of yoga, or
union).



tomāke laṅghiyā kothā jīve kṛṣṇa pāya

kṛṣṇa rāsa prakaṭilo tomāra kṛpāya (6)

Without complying with you, no soul at any time can get
Kṛṣṇa, for the manifestation of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is all
enacted only by your mercy.



tumi kṛṣṇa-sahacarī jagata-jananī

tumi dekhāile more kṛṣṇa-cintāmaṇi (7)

You are the devoted follower of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and you are
the Mother of the universe. You have shown me the
transcendental touchstone of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



niṣkapaṭa ho’ye mātā cāo mora pāne

vaiṣṇave viśwāsa vṛddhi ha’ka prati-ksaṇe (8)

My dear Mother, I sincerely wish that you will let my
faith in the Vaiṣṇavas increase at every moment.



vaiṣṇava-caraṇa vinā bhava-parābāra

bhakativinoda nāre hoibāre pāra (9)

Without the lotus feet of the devotees of the Lord,
Bhaktivinoda is not able to cross to the other side of
this ocean of material existence.




Tumi Sarveśvareśvara

Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



tumi sarveśvareśvara, brajendra-kumāra!

                          154
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


tomāra icchāya viśve sṛjana saṁhāra (1)

O youthful son of the King of Vraja, You are Lord of all
lords. According to Your will, creation and destruction
take place in the universe.



tava icchā-mato brahmā korena sṛjana

tava icchā-mato viṣnu korena pālana (2)

According to Your will Lord Brahmā creates, and
according to Your will Lord Viṣnu maintains.



tava icchā-mate śiva korena saṁhāra

tava icchā-mate māyā sṛje kārāgāra (3)

According to Your will Lord Śiva destroys, and according
to Your will māyā constructs the prison house of this
world.



tava icchā-mate jīver janama-maraṇa

samṛddhi-nipāte duḥkha sukha-saṁghaṭana (4)

According to Your will the living beings take birth and
die, and according to Your will they meet with
prosperity and ruin, happiness and sorrow.



miche māyā-baddha jīva āśā-pāśe phire’

tava icchā binā kichu korite nā pāre (5)

The tiny soul bound up by māyā vainly struggles in the
fetters of worldly desire. Without Your sanction he is
unable to do anything.



tumi to’ rākhaka ār pālaka āmāra

tomāra caraṇa binā āśā nāhi āra (6)

You are my only protector and maintainer. Except for
Your lotus feet there is no other hope for me.



nija-bala-ceṣṭā-prati bharasā chāḍiyā

tomāra icchāya āchi nirbhara koriyā (7)

No longer confident of my own strength and endeavor, I
have become solely dependent on Your will.


                          155
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



bhakativinoda ati dīna akiñcana

tomāra icchāya tā’r jīvana maraṇa (8)

Bhaktivinoda is most poor, and his pride has been
leveled. Now in accordance with Your will he lives and
dies.




Ākṣepa


—Regret—

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



gaura pahu nā bhajiyā mainu

prema-ratana-dhana helāya hārāinu (1)

Alas! Failing to serve Śrī Gaurasundara with full heart
and all senses, I have neglected the many precious
jewels (many bhāvas) of prema and have thus lost them.

adhane jatana kori dhana teyāginu

āpana karama-doṣe āpani ḍubinū (2)

Carefully attending to worthless trifles, I have thrown
away my real wealth and am drowning in a vast ocean,
being pulled under by my own misdeeds.



sat-saṅga chāḍi kainu asate vilāsa

te-kāraṇe lāgilo ye karama-bandha phÃsa (3)

Forsaking the association of sādhus for temporary
enjoyment with non-devotees, I am caught in the snare of
my own karmic follies – my hands are free but are unable
to untie the noose around my neck.



viṣaya viṣama viṣa satata khāinu

gaura-kīrtana-rase magana nā hainu (4)

I constantly drank the deadly poison of sense objects
rather than becoming absorbed in the nectar of singing
about every aspect of Śrī Gaurasundara’s vast glories.



keno vā āchaye prāṇa ki sukha pāiyā


                          156
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

narottama dāsa keno nā gelo mariyā (5)

“For what type of pleasure do I maintain my life? I try
to satisfy my hunger and thirst but whatever I eat and
drink gets caught in my throat. Coughing and choking, I
thus remain hungry and thirsty.” Narottama dāsa laments,
“Why do I not simply die?”




Ki-Rūpe Pāibo Sevā

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



ki-rūpe pāibo sevā mui durācāra

śrī-guru-vaiṣṇave rati nā hoilo āmāra (1)

Alas, I am so fallen and wretched that not even a drop
of affection for śrī-guru-vaiṣṇava comes in my heart.
Then how will I get the service of Bhagavān?



aśeṣa māyāte mana magana hoilo

vaiṣṇavete leśa-mātra rati nā janmilo (2)

My mind is always absorbed in material pursuits, not
allowing me to develop even the slightest affection for
the Vaiṣṇavas.



viṣaye bhuliyā andha hoinu divā-niśi

gale phāṅsa dite phire māyā se piśācī (3)

Absorbed inserving the senses day and night i have
become blind, and the witch māyā continues to tighten
the noose of desires she has placed around my neck.



ihāre koriyā jaya chāḍāna nā jāya

sādhu-kṛpā binā āro nahiko upāya (4)

Thus engaged, I pass my life, unable to get free. I see
that there is no other remedy than the mercy of a sādhu.



adoṣa-daraśi prabho, patita uddhāra

ei-bāro narottame koroho nistāra (5)

Narottama dāsa prays, “O venerable Vaiṣṇavas, you never
see the faults in others and are renowned as the saviors
of the fallen, so now please rescue me .”

                          157
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




Bhajo Bhajo Hari!


Śrī Locana dāsa Ṭhākura



bhajo bhajo hari, mana dṛḍa kori’, mukhe bolo tāra nāma

brajendra-nandana gopī-prāṇa-dhana, bhuvana mohana śyāma
(1)

O my dear mind, with staunch faith perform hari-bhajana,
without which you cannot be delivered. And with your
mouth chant the names of Brajendra-nandana, Gopī-prāṇa-
dhana (the life and wealth of the gopīs) and
Śyāmasundara, whose beauty enchants the whole material
manifestation.



kokhona maribe, kemone taribe, viṣama śamana ḍāke

jā’hāra pratāpe, bhuvana kāmpaye, nā jāni mara vipāke
(2)

There is no certainty when your life will finish, and
you also never think about your deliverance from the
material world. But very fearsome Yamadūtas are standing
near you. Bhagavān, whose power causes the three worlds
to tremble in fear, You have forgotten. This is your
misfortune. Thus, you are suffering in this material
world from different kinds of miseries, and now you are
about to die.



kula dhana pāiyā, unmatta hoiyā, āpanāke jāna baḍo

śamanera dūte, dhari, pāye hāte, bāṅdhiyā koribe jaḍo
(3)

You have become intoxicated by your high birth and
wealth, thinking yourself very high class. But you have
forgotten that one day the Yamadūtas will take you,
tying up your hands and feet.



kivā jati satī, kivā nīca jāti, jei hari nāhi bhaje

tabe janamiyā, bhramiyā bhramiyā, raurava-narake maje
(4)

So whether one is a sannyāsī or a very low-caste person,
without performing hari-bhajana, one will continue to
rotate in the saṁsāra and go to the hell named Raurava.



                          158
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


e dāsa locana, bhāve anukṣaṇa, michāi janama gelo

hari nā bhajiló, viṣaye majiló, hṛdoye raholo śelo (5)

Locana dāsa says, “I have never done any hari-bhajana,
having been absorbed in sense enjoyment. In this way my
human form of life has been wasted. And this causes
excruciating pain like a thorn piercing my heart.”




Ār Keno Māyā-Jāle


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



ār keno māyā-jāle paḍitecho, jīva-mīn

nāhi jāno baddha ho’ye ro’be tumi cira-din (1)

O jīva! Why like a fish are you again falling into the
nets of Māyā? Don't you know that when you get caught,
you will have to remain in this world a long, long time!



ati tuccha bhoga-āśe, bandī ho’ye māyā-pāśe

rohile bikṛta-bhāve daṇḍya jathā parādhīn (2)

Your desires for petty pleasures bind you up in Māyā’s
tight snare, keeping you in a spiritually diseased
condition, a captive in strict punishment.



ekhona bhakati-bale, kṛṣṇa-prema-sindhu-jale

krīdā kori’ anāyāse thāko tumi kṛṣṇādhīna (3)

Now, on the strength of pure devotion, play freely in
the ocean of kṛṣṇa-prema and always remain subservient
to and dependent on Śrī Kṛṣṇa.




Bhajahó Re Mana


Śrī Govinda dāsa Kavirāja



bhajahó re mana śrī nanda-nandana

abhaya-caraṇāravinda re


                             159
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

durlabha mānava-janama sat-saṅge

taroho e bhava-sindhu re (1)

O my dear mind, serve the lotus feet of Nanda-nandana,
for they bring fearlessness. This human birth is very
rare. Take the association of sādhus and cross over this
ocean of birth and death.



śīta ātapa bāta bariṣaṇa

e dina jāminī jāgi re

biphale sevinu kṛpaṇa durajana

capala sukha-laba lāgi’ re (2)

Day and night I go without sleep, suffering the pains of
heat and cold, wind and rain. In vain, simply for some
insignificant, flickering happiness which can be lost at
any moment, I have uselessly served wicked and miserly
people (thieves interested only in their own happiness,
opposed to my doing bhakti).



e dhana, yaubana, putra, parijana

ithe ki āche paratīti re

kamala-dala-jala, jīvana ṭalamala

bhajahû hari-pada niti re (3)

Wealth, youth, sons, and relatives – what real happiness
do they hold? This life is flickering, like a drop of
water tottering on the leaf of a lotus flower – at any
moment it can fall off. Therefore, always serve the
lotus feet of Śrī Hari.



śravaṇa, kīrtana, smaraṇa, vandana,

pāda-sevana, dāsya re

pūjana, sakhī-jana, ātma-nivedana

govinda-dāsa-abhilāsa re (4)

Deep in Govinda dāsa’s heart is the keen desire to
engage in the practice of the nine processes of bhakti—
hearing, chanting, remembering, offering prayers,
serving His lotus feet, engaging as servant, worshiping,
serving as a friend and completely offering one’s very
self.




Gopīnātha

                           160
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


Kalyāna-Kalpa-Taru, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



Song One

gopīnātha, mama nivedana śuno, viṣayī durjana,

sadā kāma-rata, kichu nāhi mora guṇa (1)

O Gopīnātha, please hear my prayer. I am a wicked
materialist, always addicted to worldly desires, and no
good qualities do I possess.



gopīnātha, āmāra bharasā tumi, tomāra caraṇe,

loinu śaraṇa, tomāra kiṅkora āmi (2)

O Gopīnātha, You are my only hope. Therefore I have
taken shelter at Your lotus feet. I am Your servant.



gopīnātha, kemone śodhibe more, nā jāni bhakati,

karme jaḍamati, poḍechi saṁsāra-ghore (3)

O Gopīnātha, how will You purify me? I do not know what
devotion is, and my materialistic mind is absorbed in
fruitive work. I have fallen into this dark and perilous
worldly existence.



gopīnātha, sakali tomāra māyā, nāhi mama bala,

jñāna sunirmala, svādhīna nahe e kāyā (4)

O Gopīnātha, everything here is Your illusory energy. I
have no strength or spiritual knowledge, and this body
of mine is not free from the control of material nature.

gopīnātha, niyata caraṇe sthāna, māge e pāmara,

kāṅdiyā kāṅdiyā, korohe koruṇā dāna (5)

O Gopīnātha, this wicked soul, weeping piteously, begs
for an eternal place at Your lotus feet. Please benedict
me with Your mercy.



gopīnātha, tumi to’ sakali pāro, durjane tārite,

tomāra śakati, ke āche pāpīra āro (6)

O Gopīnātha, You are able to do anything, and therefore
You have the power to deliver all sinners. Is anyone
more of a sinner than myself?



                          161
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


gopīnātha, tumi kṛpā-pārābāro, jīvera kāraṇe,

āsiyā prapañce, līlā koile su-vistāra (7)

O Gopīnātha, You are an endless ocean of mercy. Having
come into this phenomenal world, You display Your divine
pastimes for the sake of the living beings.



gopīnātha, āmi ki doṣe doṣī, asura sakala,

pāilo caraṇa, vinoda thākilo bosi’ (8)

O Gopīnātha, I am so sinful that even while all the
demons have attained Your lotus feet, Bhaktivinoda
remains sitting in worldly existence.



Song Two

gopīnātha, ghucāo saṁsāra-jvālā, avidyā-jātanā,

ār nāhi sahe, janama-maraṇa-mālā (1)

O Gopīnātha, please remove the burning torment I am
feeling due to this worldly existence. Tortured by
ignorance, I am unable to tolerate any longer the yoke
of the repeated succession of birth and death.



gopīnātha, āmi to’ kāmera dāsa, viṣaya-bāsanā,

jāgiche hṛdoye, phādiche karama phāse (2)

O Gopīnātha, I am the faithful servant of lust. So many
desires for mundane sense enjoyment are dawning within
my heart, and I am being choked by the noose of fruitive
actions and reactions.



gopīnātha, kabe bā jāgibo āmi, kāma-rūpa ari,

dūre teyāgibo, hṛdoye sphuribe tumi (3)

O Gopīnātha, when will I wake up and cast far away my
enemy in the form of lust? I will only be able to do so
if You will kindly manifest Yourself in my heart.



gopīnātha, āmi to’ tomāra jana, tomāre chāḍiyā,

saṁsāra bhajinu, bhuliyā āpana-dhana (4)

O Gopīnātha, I am actually Yours! But abandoning You to
enjoy the material world, I have forgotten my real
wealth.



                          162
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


gopīnātha, tumi to’ sakali jāno, āpanāra jane,

daṇḍiyā ekhona, śrī-caraṇe deho sthāna (5)

O Gopīnātha, certainly You know everything. You may now
punish Your servant and thus give him a place at Your
beautiful lotus feet.



gopīnātha, ei ki vicāra taba, vimukha dekhiyā,

chāḍo nija-jane, nā koro’ karuṇā lava (6)

O Gopīnātha, is this Your mentality? Seeing that Your
own servant is averse to You, do You abandon him without
bestowing even a drop of mercy?



gopīnātha, āmi to’ mūrakha ati, kise bhālo hoya,

kabhu nā bujhinu, tāi heno mama gati (7)

O Gopīnātha, I am indeed a great fool, and I could never
understand what was good for me. Such is my fate.



gopīnātha, tumi to’ paṇḍita bara, mūḍhera maṅgala,

tumi anveṣibe, e dāse nā bhāvo’ para (8)

O Gopīnātha, You are indeed the wisest person of all and
are searching ways and means to bring auspiciousness for
the fools (of this world). Please do not consider this
servant an outsider.




Song Three

gopīnātha, āmāra upāya nāi, tumi kṛpā kori,

āmāre loile, saṁsāre uddhāra pāi (1)

O Gopīnātha, I cannot see any means of deliverance. Only
if You bestow Your causeless mercy and take me to Your
realm, then it will be possible for me to get
deliverance from the saṁsāra.



gopīnātha, poḍechi māyāra phere, dhana, dārā, suta,

ghireche āmāre, kāmete rekheche jere (2)

O Gopīnātha, I have become entangled in material
illusion. Wealth, wife and sons have completely
encircled me, and I have been wasted away by the
smouldering coals of lust.

                          163
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017




gopīnātha, mana je pāgala mora, nā māne śāsana,

sadā acetana, viṣaye ro’yeche ghora (3)

O Gopīnātha, my mind has gone completely insane; it is
unconscious; and it has no respect at all for any
authority, thus forcing me to remain in this ghastly pit
of sense gratification.

gopīnātha, hāra je menechi āmi, aneka jatana,

hoilo biphala, ekhona bharasā tumi (4)

O Gopīnātha, I now give in and accept my defeat. All of
my various endeavors have proved futile. Now You are my
only hope.



gopīnātha, kemone hoibe gati, prabala indriya,

vaśībhūta mana, nā chāḍe viṣaya-rati (5)

O Gopīnātha, how can I make any advancement towards the
ultimate goal? My mind has come under the control of the
powerful senses and I am unable to give up addiction to
enjoying sense objects.



gopīnātha, hṛdoye basiyā mora, manake śamiyā,

loho nija pāne, ghucibe vipada ghora (6)

O Gopīnātha, please reside in my heart. Subdue my mind
and free me from this life of terrible calamities.



gopīnātha, anātha dekhiyā more, tumi hṛṣīkeśa,

hṛṣīka damiyā, tāra’ he saṁṣṛti-ghore (7)

O Gopīnātha, You are known as Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of
the senses. Seeing me in such a helpless condition,
kindly subdue my senses and deliver me from this dark
and perilous worldly existence.



gopīnātha, galāya legeche phāsa, kṛpā-asi dhori’,

bandhana chediyā, vinoda koroho dāsa (8)

O Gopīnātha, the noose of materialism is tightly fixed
around my neck. Taking up the sharp sword of Your mercy
and severing this bondage, please make this Bhaktivinoda
Your servant.




                          164
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017



Hari Hari! Biphale Janama Gõāinu

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



hari hari! biphale janama gõāinu

manuṣya janama pāiyā, rādhā-kṛṣṇa nā bhajiyā,

jāniyā suniyā biṣa khāinu (1)

O Hari! Even after receiving this rare human birth, I
have wasted this life, not having performed bhajana of
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Rather, I have knowingly drunk poison.



golokera prema-dhana, hari-nāma saṅkīrtana,

rati nā janmilo kene tāya

saṁsāra-biṣānale, dibā-niśi hiyā jwale,

juḍāite nā koinu upāya (2)

The treasure of prema-bhakti has descended with nāma-
saṅkīrtana. Oh, why am I not attracted to it? My heart
is burning night and day in the poisonous fire of
material life, but I have not taken the remedy to
extinguish it.



brajendra-nandana jei, śacī-suta hoilo sei

balarāma hoilo nitāi

dīna-hīna jata chilo, hari-nāme uddhārilo,

tāra śākṣī jagāi mādhāi (3)

Brajendra-nandana has come as Śacī-suta Gaurasundara.
Balarāma has come as Nityānanda. They delivered all the
fallen and wretched jīvas through hari-nāma, as
witnessed in Jagāi and Mādhāi.



hā hā prabhu nanda-suta, vṛṣabhānu-sutā-juta,

koruṇā koroho ei-bāro

narottama-dāsa koya, nā ṭheliho rāṅgā pāya

tomā bine ke āche āmāra (4)

He Rādhe! He Kṛṣṇa! Please give me mercy this time.
Don’t push me away from Your lotus feet, red like
lotuses. Except for You, who else is mine in this world?



                             165
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017




Sukhera Lāgiyā

Śrī Caṇḍīdāsa



sukhera lāgiyā, ei ghara bāṅdhinu, āgune puḍiyā gelo

amiyā sāgare, sināna korite, sakali garala bhelo (1)

Aho! In the hope of finding happiness, I labored hard to
build a house, but fire came and it was burned up. I
swam in the ocean of nectar, but that nectar turned out
to be poison.



sakhi! ki mora kapāle lekhi

śītala baliyā, cāṣda sevinu, bhānura kiraṇa dekhi (2)

He sakhi! O my dear friend, how unfortunate I am!
Knowing that moonbeams are very cooling, I went to take
shelter of the moon to cool off my burning body, but
those rays turned into hot sunrays which scorched me
instead.



ucala baliyā, acale caḍinu, paḍinu agādha-jale

lachmī cāhite, dāridra beḍhala, māṇika hārānu hele (3)

Knowing the height of a mountain, I climbed to the peak
and then fell into the deep ocean. I want money but I am
always surrounded by poverty. A very valuable touchstone
came in my hand but at once I lost it.



nagara basālāma, sāgara bāṅdhilāma, māṇika pāvāra āśe

sāgara śukāla, māṇika lukala, abhāgī-karama-doṣe (4)

I built a city on the shore of the ocean and made a dam
to move the ocean in the hope of finding gemstones on
the ocean bed, but due to the fault of my own ill
fortune, the gemstones also hid ṭhemselves.



piyāsa lāgiyā, jalada sevinu, bajara paḍiyā gelo

kahe caṇḍīdāsa, śyāmera pirīti, marame raholo śelo (5)

When I was thirsty, I took shelter of a cloud (but rain
did not come). Instead, a thunderbolt struck my head.
The poet Śrī Caṇḍīdāsa laments, “That I have no
affection for the lotus feet of Śrī Śyāmasundara is the
only sorrow in my heart. (My love for Śyāma is like a
trident piercing my heart.)”

                          166
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017




Mānasa, Deho, Geho

Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



mānāsa, deho, geho, jo kichu mora

arpiló tuwā pade, nanda-kiśora! (1)

Mind, body, family, everything I own I offer at Your
lotus feet, O Nanda-kiśora!



sampade vipade, jīvane-maraṇe

dāy mama gelā, tuwā o-pada baraṇe (2)

In good fortune or in bad, in life or in death, I take
shelter at Your lotus feet. All of my possessions I have
given to You so now I no longer take any responsibility
for them.



mārobi, rākhobi—jo icchā tohārā

nitya-dāsa prati tuwā adhikārā (3)

Slay me or protect me as You wish. You have this right
because I am Your eternal servant.



janmāobi moe icchā jadi tor

bhakta-gṛhe jani janma hau mor (4)

If it is Your will that I be born again, then may it be
in the home of Your devotee.



kīṭa-janma hau jathā tuwā dāsa

bahir-mukha brahma-janme nāhi āśa (5)

May I be born again even as a worm, as long as I remain
Your devotee. I have no desire to be born as a Brahmā
averse to You.



bhukti-mukti-spṛhā-vihīna je bhakta

labhaite tāka saṅga anurakta (6)

I yearn for the company of that devotee who is

                          167
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

completely devoid of all desire for worldly enjoyment or
liberation.

janaka, jananī, doyita, tanoya

prabhu, guru, pati—tuhó sarva-moya (7)

Father, mother, lover, son, Lord, preceptor and husband—
You are everything to me.



bhakativinoda kahe, suno kāna!

rādhā-nātha! tuhó āmāra parāṇa (8)

Bhaktivinoda says, “O Kāna, please hear me! O beloved of
Rādhā, You are my very life and soul!”




Avatāra-Sāra


Śrī Locana dāsa Ṭhākura



avatāra-sāra, gorā-avatāra, keno nā bhajili tā’re

kori’ nīre vāsa, gelo nā piyāsa, āpana karama phere (1)

O my mind, why don’t you worship Śrī Gaurasundara, the
crown-jewel of all incarnations? You always stay in
water but your thirst is never satiated due to your own
actions.



kanṭakera taru, sadāi sevili (mana), amṛta pāivāra āśe

prema-kalpataru, śrī gaurāṅga āmāra, tā’hāre bhāvili
viṣe (2)

You always serve some thorny tree, hoping to attain
sweet, juicy fruits, but this is not possible. Our
Gaurasundara is a kalpa-vṛkṣa of love, but you neglect
Him, thinking Him to be poison.



saurabhera āśe, palāśa śókili (mana), nāśāte paśilo kīṭa

ikṣudaṇḍa bhāvi, kāṭha cuṣili (mana), kemone pāibi miṭha
(3)

O my mind, searching for some sweet aroma, you   smell the
beautiful palāsa flower (but it has no scent),   and
instead, an insect from the flower enters your   nose. You
suck on dry wood, mistaking it for sugar cane,   so how
can you get any sweet juice?


                          168
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



hāra boliyā, galāya parili (mana), śamana kiṅkora-sāpa

śītala boliyā, āguna pohāli (mana), pāili bajara tāpa
(4)

O my mind, around your neck you drape the snake of
death, thinking it a garland. You enter fire, thinking
it to be cool, only to suffer cruel burning.



saṁsāra bhajili śrī gaurāṅga bhūlili, nā sunili sādhura
kathā

iha parakāla, dukāla khoyāli (mana), khāili āpana māthā
(5)

O my mind, adoring material life, you never heeded the
devotees’ words and forgot Gaurasundara. Thus, you
simply destroy your own self, wasting both this life and
the next.



Hari He Doyāla Mora

Śrī Vidyāpati



hari he doyālo mora jaya rādhānātha

bār-bār eibār loho nija sātha (1)

O Hari! O my merciful Rādhā-nātha! All glories to You.
Again and again I have petitioned You, and now I am
begging You to accept me in Your intimate company.



bahu yoni bhrami’ nātha, loinu śaraṇa

nija-guṇe kṛpā koro adhama-tāraṇa (2)

O my Master! After wandering through many species of
life, I have come to Your shelter. Out of Your
magnanimity, kindly deliver this degraded person.



jagat-kāraṇa tumi jagat-jīvana

tomā chāḍā kā’ro nahi he rādhā-ramaṇa (3)

He Rādhā-Ramaṇa! You are the cause behind the creation
and its very life. You are my only support, there is no
one else.



bhuvana-maṅgala tumi bhuvanera pati


                          169
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

tumi upekṣile nātha, ki hoibe gati (4)

He Nātha! You are the source of auspiciousness and
beneficent master of the three worlds. If You forsake
me, then what will be my end?



bhāviyā dekhinu ei jagat-mājhāre

tomā binā keho nāhi e dāse uddhāre (5)

He Prabhu! I have come to the conclusion that in this
material ocean there is no one else to deliver this
servant but You.




Mādhava, Bahuta Minati Kori Toya

Śrī Vidyāpati



mādhava, bahuta minati kori toya, dei tulasī tila,

deho samarpinu, doyā jāni nā chāḍabi moya (1)



O Mādhava, with this offering of a Tulasī leaf and
sesame seeds, I beseech You and pledge my body in Your
service. I know Your compassion is such that You will
not reject me.



gaṇaite doṣa, guṇaleśa nā pāobi,

yab tuhū korobi vicāra

tuhū jagannātha, jagate kahāosi,

jaga-bāhir nahi mui chāra (2)

While considering this appeal, You will only be able to
count my faults. You will not find even a trace of good
qualities in me. You are known throughout the creation
as Jagannātha. Therefore do I, a worthless soul living
within this universe, not have the right to accept You
as my master?



kiye mānuṣa paśu, pakhī ye janamiye,

athavā kīṭa - pataṅge

karama - vipāke, gatāgati punaḥ punaḥ,

mati rahu tuyā parasaṅge (3)


                          170
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

Birth after birth, as a result of my karma, I repeatedly
come and go, sometimes as a human, sometimes as an
animal and sometimes as a bird, worm or insect. But in
whatever birth I take, may my mind always remain fixed
on Your narrations.



bhaṇaye vidyāpati, atiśoya kātara,

taraite iha bhava-sindhu

tuyā pada-pallava, kari avalambana,

tila eka deho dīna-bandhu (4)

With great remorse, the poet Vidyāpati humbly prays, “O
Mādhava, O friend of the fallen, please give this
insignificant person shelter at the tender blossoms of
Your lotus feet. In this way I may cross over this ocean
of material existence.”




Sarvasva Tomāra

Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



sarvasva tomāra, caraṇe saṁpiyā, poḍechi tomāra ghare

tumi to’ ṭhākura, tomāra kukura, boliyā jānaho more (1)

He Prabhu! I have surrendered my everything at Your
lotus feet and remain prostrate in Your house. You are
my Lord and I am Your dog. Kindly accept me as such.



bāndhiyā nikaṭe, āmāre pālibe, rohibo tomāra dvāre

pratīpa-janere, āsite nā dibo, rākhibo gaḍera pāre (2)

Chain me nearby. I shall stand guard at the door of your
house. I will not allow any unfavorable people to enter
and will send them far away.



taba nija-jana, prasāda seviyā, ucchiṣṭa rākhibe jāhā

āmāra bhojana, parama-ānande, prati-din ha’be tāha (3)

Daily in supreme bliss I will accept the remnants of
Your dear devotees who have honored Your prasāda.

bosiyā śuiyā, tomāra caraṇa, cintibo satata āmi

nācite nācite, nikaṭe jāibo, jakhona ḍākibe tumi (4)

When lying down and sitting up, I will constantly

                           171
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

remember Your lotus feet, and when You call me, I will
immediately come to You, dancing in bliss.



nijera poṣaṇa, kabhu nā bhāvibo, rohibo bhāvera bhore

bhakativinoda, tomāre pālaka, boliyā varaṇa kore (5)

Śrī Bhaktivinoda says, “O Prabhu! Never thinking of my
own sustenance, I will perpetually remain submerged in
bhāva, because I have accepted You as my maintainer.”




‘Āmāra’ Bolite Prabhu!


Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



‘āmāra’ bolite prabhu! āro kichu nāi

tumi-i āmāra mātro pītā-bandhu-bhāi (1)

He Prabhu! Apart from You I have nothing in this world.
You are even father, friend and brother for me.



bandhu, dārā, suta, sutā—taba dāsī dāsa

sei to’ sambandhe sabe āmāra prayāsa (2)

So-called friends, wife, sons and daughters are all Your
servants. I maintain them only out of duty to You.



dhana, jana, gṛha, dāra ‘tomāra’ boliyā

rakhā kori āmi mātro sevaka hoiyā (3)

This wealth, family members, home and possessions are
Yours. Because of this I protect them. I am Your servant
only.



tomāra kārjera tare upārjibo dhana

tomāra saṁsāre-byaya koribo bahan (4)

For Your service I will earn money and by this I will
manage Your family.



bhālo-manda nāhi jāni sebā mātro kori

tomāra saṁsāre āmi viṣaya-praharī (5)

                          172
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


O My Lord, I know neither good nor bad. I am only Your
servant, the watchman guarding the properties of Your
household.



tomāra icchāya mora indriya-cālanā

śravaṇa, darśana, ghrāṇa, bhojana-vāsanā (6)

I engage my senses—hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting
and so on—according to Your desire.

nija-sukha lāgi’ kichu nāhi kori āro

bhakativinoda bole, taba sukha-sāra (7)

Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura says, “He Prabhu! I no longer
act for myself. Your happiness is the very essence of my
life.”




Prabhu Tava Pada-yuge

Gītāvalī, Śrī Śikśāṣṭaka – Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



prabhu tava pada-yuge mora nivedan

nāhi māgi deha-sukha, vidyā, dhana, jan (1)

O Lord! This is my humble submission at Your lotus feet.
I do not ask from You sensual pleasure, learning,
wealth, or followers.



nāhi māgi swarga, āra mokṣa nāhi māgi

nā kori prārthanā kono vibhūtira lāgi’ (2)

I do not beg for residence on the celestial planets, nor
do I wish liberation from this mundane existence. Nor do
I pray for the attainment of any mystic powers.



nija-karma-guna-doṣe je je janma pāi

janme janme jeno tava nāma-guna gāi (3)

Whatever birth I may obtain due to the faults of my
previous worldly activities, I pray that I may sing the
glories of Your holy name birth after birth.



ei mātra āśā mama tomār caraṇe


                          173
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

ahoitukī bhakti hṛde jāge anukṣane (4)

This is my only desire, O Lord, and I submit it at Your
lotus feet: That unmotivated devotion to You may
constantly awaken in my heart.



viṣaye je prīti ebe āchaye āmār

sei-mata prīti hauk caraṇe tomār (5)

As much attachment as I now have for worldly affairs, I
pray that a similar degree of attachment may develop for
Your holy feet.



vipade sampade tāhā thākuk sama-bhāve

dine dine vṛddhi hauk nāmera prabhāve (6)

I pray that my love for You may remain undisturbed both
in misfortune and in prosperity, and that day after day
it may increase by the power and influence of Your holy
name.



paśu-pakṣi ho’ye thāki swarge vā niroye

tava bhakti rahu bhaktivinoda-hṛdoye (7)

Be my life in heaven or in hell, be it as a bird or a
beast, may devotion to You always remain within the
heart of Bhaktivinoda.




Kabe Ha’be Bolo

Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



kabe ha’be bolo se-dina āmār

(āmār) aparādha ghuci’, śuddha-nāme ruci,

kṛpa-bale ha’be hṛdoye sañcār (1)

Please tell me, when will that day be mine when my
offenses will end and a taste for the pure holy name
will be infused in my heart by Your mercy?



tṛṇādhika hīna, kabe nija māni,

sahiṣṇutā-guṇa hṛdoyete āni

sakale mānada, āpani amānī,

                          174
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


ho’ye āswādibo nāma-rasa-sār (2)

When will I feel myself lower than a blade of grass, and
when will the quality of tolerance come in my heart?
When I will show respect to all others and not seek
honor for myself, then I will taste śrī-nāma-rasa, the
nectar of the holy name.



dhana jana āra, kobitā-sundarī,

bolibo nā cāhi deho-sukha-karī

janme-janme dāo, ohe gaurahari!

ahaitukī bhakti caraṇe tomār (3)

Wealth, followers, beautiful women as described in
worldly poetry—I do not want any such bodily pleasures.
O Gaurahari, please give me unmotivated devotion to Your
lotus feet birth after birth.



(kabe) korite śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma uccāraṇa,

pulakita deho gadgada bacana

baibarṇya-bepathu ha’be saṁghaṭana,

nirantara netre ba’be aśru-dhār (4)

When, while uttering śrī kṛṣṇa-nāma, will my body be
thrilled in ecstatic rapture with my hairs standing on
end, my words choked with emotion, pallor and trembling
occurring, and streams of tears flowing constantly from
my eyes?



kabe navadvīpe, suradhunī-taṭe,

gaura-nityānanda boli’ niṣkapaṭe

nāciyā gāiyā, beḍāibo chuṭe,

bātulera prāya chāḍiyā bicār (5)

When, in Navadvīpa on the banks of the Gaṅgā, will I run
about, calling out without duplicity, “O Gaura! O
Nityānanda!” and dancing and singing like a madman,
unaware of the outside world?



kabe nityānanda more kori’ doyā,

chāḍāibe mora biṣayera māyā

diyā more nija-caraṇera chāyā

nāmera hāṭete dibe adhikār (6)

                          175
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


When will Nityānanda Prabhu be merciful to me and
release me from the trap of sense enjoyment? When will
He give me the shade of His lotus feet and allow me to
enter the market-place of the holy name?



kinibo, luṭibo hari-nāma-rasa,

nāma-rase māti’ hoibo bibaśa

rasera rasika-caraṇa paraśa,

koriyā mojibo rase anibār (7)

I shall buy and plunder the nectar of the name of Hari
and, becoming thoroughly intoxicated by that nāma-rasa,
I shall become stunned. By touching the feet of those
great souls who are able to relish that rasa, I will
drown continuously in the sweet nectar of the holy name.



kabe jībe doyā, hoibe udoya,

nija-sukha bhuli’ sudīna-hṛdoya

bhakativinoda, koriyā binoya,

śrī-ājña-ṭahalo koribe pracār (8)

When will compassion for all fallen souls awaken in me?
When will this Bhaktivinoda, forgetting his own
happiness, with a meek and soft heart set out to
propagate by humble entreaty the sacred order of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu?




Śuddha-Bhakata

Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



śuddha-bhakata-caraṇa-reṇu, bhajana-anukūla

bhakata-sevā, parama-siddhi, prema-latikāra-mūla (1)

Dust from the lotus feet of pure devotees is very
favorable for bhajana, and service to the Vaiṣṇavas is
the highest perfection and the very root of the tender
creeper of divine love.



mādhava-tithi, bhakti-jananī, jatane pālana kori,

kṛṣṇa-basoti, basoti boli’, parama ādare bori (2)

Very carefully I observe Mādhava’s holy days like

                          176
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī for they are the mother of
devotion. Kṛṣṇa stays in these tithis, so by honoring
them we can easily achieve Him. By deeply respecting
Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-sthāna (pastime places), I will receive
their blessings.



gaura āmāra, je-sāba sthāne, koralo bhramaṇa raṅge

se-saba sthāna, heribo āmi, praṇayi-bhakata-saṅge (3)

In the company of praṇayi (intimate, beloved) devotees,
I will go to all the places where Mahāprabhu joyfully
wandered.

mṛdaṅga bādya, sunite mana, abasara sadā jāce,

gaura-bihita, kīrtana suni’, ānande hṛdoya nāce (4)

My mind is always anxious to hear the mṛdaṅga play. When
I hear kīrtana describing Mahāprabhu, my heart dances in
joy.



jugala-mūrti, dekhiyā mora, parama-ānanda hoya

prasāda-sebā, korite hoya, sakala prapañca jaya (5)

I feel the highest bliss upon seeing the deity forms of
Yugala-Kiśora. Their prasāda enables one to conquer the
five elements.



je-dina gṛhe, bhajana dekhi, gṛhete goloka bhāya

caraṇa-sīdhū, dekhiyā gaṅgā, sukha nā sīmā pāya (6)

My home is transformed into Goloka Vṛndāvana when I see
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s worship being performed there. When I
honor Śrī Bhagavān’s caranāmṛta and look upon the Gaṅgā,
my happiness knows no bounds.



tulasī dekhi’, juḍāya prāṇa, mādhava-toṣanī jāni’,

gaura-priya, śāka-sevane, jīvana sārthaka māni (7)

When I see Tulasī, my heart becomes cool and soft,
because I know that she pleases Mādhava. Śāka (22
varieties of greens) is very dear to Mahāprabhu, so when
I honor it, I consider my life successful.



bhakativinoda, kṛṣṇa-bhajane, anukūla pāya jāhā,

prati-dibase, parama-sukhe, swīkāra koroye tāhā (8)

Everything that is favorable for kṛṣṇa-bhajana,
Bhaktivinoda accepts every day most happily.

                          177
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017




Śuno, He Rasika Jana

Kalyāṇa-kalpataru - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



śuno, he rasika jana, kṛṣṇa-guṇa agaṇana,

ananta kohite nāhi pāre

kṛṣṇa jagatera guru, kṛṣṇa vāñchā-kalpa-taru,

nāvika se bhava-pārābāre (1)

Listen to this, o wisest relishers of mellows! Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental qualities are innumerable; indeed
it is not possible to describe all His unlimited
attributes. Kṛṣṇa is the spiritual master of the entire
universe, He is a wish-fulfilling desire-tree, and He is
the helmsman of the boat on the ocean of material
existence.



hṛdoya pīḍita jā’ra, kṛṣṇa cikitsaka tā’ra,

bhava-roga nāśite catura

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha-jane, premāmṛta-vitaraṇe,

krame loya nija antaḥpura (2)

Kṛṣṇa is the doctor for those whose hearts are ailing,
as He is very expert at destroying the diseased
condition of material existence. By distributing the
nectar of ecstatic love to all the inimical souls, He
gradually takes them back into His own confidential
realm.



karma-bandha, jñāna-bandha, āveśe mānava andha,

tā’re kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sāgara

pāda-padma-madhu diyā, andha-bhāva ghucāiyā,

caraṇe korena anucāra (3)

Kṛṣṇa is an ocean of compassion for those who are bound
up in fruitive reactions, as well as for those bound up
in philosophical speculation, and for those blinded by
other human perplexities. Giving the honey of His lotus
feet, and thus relieving the darkness of such
worldliness, He makes one a personal attendant at His
lotus feet.




                            178
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

vidhi-mārga-rata-jane, swādhīnatā ratna-dāne,

rāga-mārge korāna praveśa

rāga-baśavartī ho’ye, pārakīya-bhāvāśroye,

labhe jīva kṛṣṇa-premāveśa (4)

Kṛṣṇa eventually bestows the jewel of independence unto
those persons who are attached to the path of rules and
regulations, thereby allowing them entrance into the
path of spontaneous loving service. Becoming influenced
by such spontaneity, remaining under the shelter of
pārakīya-bhāva, the soul finally attains all the
symptoms of ecstatic love for Kṛṣṇa.



premāmṛta-vāri-dhārā, sadā pāna-rata tā’rā

kṛṣṇa tāhādera bandhu, pati

sei saba vraja-jana, sukalyāṇa-niketana

dīna hīna vinodera gati (5)

Kṛṣṇa is the dearmost friend and husband of those who
are always attached to drinking the fountain of ecstatic
tears of love. Thus, the goal of this most fallen and
lowly Bhaktivinoda is to be with all such residents of
Vraja within the abode of supreme auspiciousness.




Doyāla Nitāi Caitanya Bole


Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



doyāla nitāi caitanya bole nāc re āmāra mana

nāc re āmāra mana, nāc re āmāra mana (1)

O my mind, chant ‘doyāla (merciful) nitāi caitanya’ and
just dance! O my mind, dance!



emon doyāla to nāi he, māra kheye prema deya

(ore) aparādha dūre jābe, pābe prema-dhana

o nāme aparādha-bicāra to nāi he

(takhon) kṛṣṇa-nāme ruci ha’be, ghucibe bandhana (2)

Such a merciful personality as Nityānanda Prabhu, who
bestows prema even after being beaten, is not to be
found anywhere. Prema can come after offenses are
overcome, but in chanting of the names Caitanya-Nitāi,

                             179
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

there is no consideration of offenses. Once taste for
kṛṣṇa-nāma comes, material bondage breaks.



kṛṣṇa-nāme anurāga to ha’be he

(takhon) anāyāse saphala ha’be jīvera jīvana

When there is deep love for kṛṣṇa-nāma, then easily
one’s life becomes successful.



kṛṣṇa-rati binā jīvana to miche he

(śeṣe) vṛndāvane rādhā-śyāmera pā’be daraśana

gaura-kṛpā ho’le he (3)

Without attachment to Kṛṣṇa, life is simply false. With
the mercy of Gaurasundara one can obtain the vision of
Rādhā-Śyāma at the end of life.




Aruṇodoya-Kīrtana

—Sunrise Song—

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



udilo aruṇa pūraba bhāge,

dvija-maṇi gorā amani jāge,

bhakata-samūha loiyā sāthe,

gelā nagara-vrāje (1)

When the red-tinged sun began to rise on the eastern
horizon, Śrī Gaurāṅga, the jewel amongst brāhmaṇas, at
once awoke and took His devotees out into the villages
of Navadvīpa.



‘tāthai tāthai’ bājalo khola,

ghana ghana tāhe jhÃjera rola,

preme ḍhala ḍhala sonāra aṅga,

caraṇe nūpura bāje (2)

‘Tāthai tāthai’ the mṛdaṅgas resounded; the karatālas
played in time. Overflowing with prema, Śrī Gaurāṅga’s
golden form swayed gracefully, causing His anklebells
(nūpuras) to jingle at His feet.


                             180
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



mukunda mādhava yādava hari,

bolo-re bolo-re vadana bhori’,

miche nida-vaśe gelo-re rāti,

divasa śarīra-sāje (3)

“Mukunda! Mādhava! Yādava! Hari! Everyone, chant! Chant!
Fill your mouths with the holy names of the Lord! Oh,
you pass your nights in vain, captivated by sleep, and
your days decorating your body.

emona durlabha mānava-deho,

pāiyā ki koro bhāvanā keho,

ebe nā bhojile yaśodā-suta,

carame paḍibe lāje (4)

“You have achieved this rare human birth! What are you
doing? Don’t you care for this gift? Now, if you don’t
worship the son of Yaśodā, ultimately, at the time of
death you will fall into a shameful condition.



udita tapana hoile asta,

dina gelo boli’ hoibe vyasta,

tabe keno ebe alasa hoi’

nā bhaja hṛdoya-rāje (5)

“With every rising and setting of the sun, a day passes
and is lost. Then why are you still idle; why are you
not worshiping the Lord in the heart?



jīvana anitya jānaha sāra,

tāhe nānā-vidha vipada bhāra,

nāmāśraya kori’ jatane tumi,

thākoho āpana kāje (6)

“Understand this essential fact—material life is
temporary and filled with many dangers and woes. You
should earnestly take shelter of the holy names, and
perform only the bare necessities required to maintain
your life.”



kṛṣṇa-nāma-sudhā koriyā pāna

juḍāo bhakativinoda-prāṇa


                             181
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

nāma binā kichu nāhiko āro

caudda-bhuvana-mājhe (7)

Drink the pure nectar of kṛṣṇa-nāma and thus give relief
to Bhaktivinoda’s burning heart. There is nothing except
nāma in all the fourteen worlds.



jīvera kalyāṇa-sādhana-kāma,

jagate āsi’ e madhura nāma,

avidyā-timira-tapana-rūpe

hṛd-gagane virāje (8)

Desiring to bless the activities of all living entities,
these sweet holy names have descended to this worldly
plane. They shine like the sun in the sky of the heart,
destroying the darkness of ignorance.




Jīva Jāgo, Jīva Jāgo

—Wake Up! Wake Up, Sleeping Souls!—

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



jīva jāgo, jīva jāgo, gorācānda bole

kota nidrā jāo māyā-piśācīra kole (1)

Śrī Gaurācānda is calling, “Wake up! Wake up, sleeping
souls! How long will you sleep in the lap of the witch
Māyā?”



bhajibo boliyā ese’ saṁsāra-bhītore

bhuliyā rohile tumi avidyāra bhore (2)

“You have come into this material world saying you will
worship the Lord, but, having forgotten Him, you have
become filled with ignorance.”



tomāre loite āmi hoinu avatāra

āmi vinā bandhu āra ke āche tomāra (3)

“Just to rescue you, I have descended! Who else is your
friend but Me?




                             182
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

enechi auṣadhi māyā nāśibāro lāgi’

harināma mahā-mantra lao tumi māgi’ (4)

“I have brought you the hari-nāma mahā-mantra—the
medicine to destroy the disease of māyā. Take these holy
names, I beg of you!”



bhakativinoda prabhu-caraṇe paḍiyā

sei harināma-mantra loilo māgiyā (5)

Falling at the lotus feet of Śrīman Mahāprabhu,
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has begged for and taken this
harināma-mantra.




Nāma–Saṅkīrtana—Hari Haraye Namaḥ Kṛṣṇa

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura



(hari) haraye namaḥ kṛṣṇa yādavāya namaḥ

yādavāya mādhavāya keśavāya namaḥ (1)



gopāla govinda rāma śrī-madhusūdana

giridhārī gopīnātha madana-mohana (2)



śrī-caitanya-nityānanda śrī-advaita-goptā (sītā)

hari-guru-vaiṣṇava bhāgavata-gītā (3)



śrī-rūpa śrī-sanātana bhaṭṭa-raghunātha

śrī-jīva gopāla-bhaṭṭa dāsa-raghunātha (4)



ei chaya gosāir kori caraṇa vandana

jāhā hoite vighna-nāśa abhīṣṭa-pūraṇa (5)



ei chaya gosāi jāra—mui tāra dāsa

tā-sabāra pada-reṇu mora pañca-grāsa (6)




                          183
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

tādera caraṇa-sevi-bhakta-sane vāsa

janame janame hoy ei abhilāṣa (7)



ei chaya gosāi jabe vraje koilā vāsa

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-nitya-līlā korilā prakāśa (8)



ānande bolo hari bhaja vṛndāvana

śrī-guru-vaiṣṇava-pade majāiyā mana (9)



śrī-guru-vaiṣṇava-pāda-padma kori āśa

nāma-saṅkīrtana kohe narottama-dāsa (10)



—Translation and Purport—

Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

(1) Kṛṣṇa is Himself Hari and He is also Yādava. He is
in the dynasty of both Nanda Bābā and of Vasudeva; all
are Yādavas, the dynasty of Yadu. So my daṇḍavat praṇāma
to the lotus feet of svayaṁ Hari who is Yādava Kṛṣṇa.
Namaḥ means giving up all kinds of worldly relations,
upādhis, and offering our everything to the lotus feet
of Kṛṣṇa.

(2) That same Kṛṣṇa is Gopāla, He who supports and
nourishes the cows, their pastures, all gopas, and
gopīs. He is also Govinda, who gives pleasure to all
these things. He is Rāma, who plays in the hearts of all
beings, especially the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He is
Madhusūdana because He cuts off all kinds of āsakti,
worldly attachments (as in the Madhu demon), and He also
tastes the madhu, that is, the love and affection of all
the gopīs and especially of māhābhāva svarūpā Śrīmatī
Rādhike. Giridhārī lifts Govardhana Mountain and saves
all the vrajavāsīs. He is Gopīnātha because He is the
heart and soul of all the gopīs. He is also Madana-
Mohana because He attracts and controls all beings, and
He steals the hearts of the Vrajavāsīs and gopīs. Thus
He is Gopāla, Govinda, Rāma, Madhusūdana, Giridhārī,
Gopīnātha, Madana-Mohana, so I offer my daṇḍavat praṇāma
to this selfsame Kṛṣṇa.

(3) Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī
Advaita Prabhu, Advaita Ācārya can give us the service
of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa yugala. Without any cause, all of
them can mercifully protect us from worldly attachments,
anarthas and aparādhas, and They can engage us in Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s sevā. So I am offering namaskāra at the lotus
feet of Śrī Caitanya, Nityānanda, Advaita Prabhu and at
the lotus feet of Śrī Hari, the dīkṣā-guru, the śikṣā-
guru, the Vaiṣṇavas, and also the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
Śrīmad Bhagavad-Gīta. Both Sītā and goptā mean

                            184
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

protector, or guardian. Sītā, the wife of Advaita
Ācārya, is very favorable for Mahāprabhu sevā and can
give kṛṣṇa-prema. Narottama dāsa originally wrote goptā,
because there is no female’s name given, but later
someone else changed it.

(4) I do vandanā, or offer prayers and glorifications,
to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana, Bhaṭṭa Raghunātha,
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa and Dāsa Raghunātha.

(5) By the causeless mercy of ṣaḍ-gosvāmī the obstacles
to devotion can be removed and my abhīṣṭa Śrī Yugala
service can be attained, that is, all my desires can be
fulfilled.

(6) I am a servant of that Caitanya Mahāprabhu who is
the iṣṭadeva or worshipable Lord of the Six Gosvāmīs.
Their lotus foot dust is my pañca-grāsa, my life and
soul. We take pañca-grāsa, five kinds of foodstuffs or
mahā-prasāda, by which we maintain our five life airs.
In the same way the dust of the lotus feet of these ṣaḍ
gosvāmī is our life and soul, maintaining our five
prāṇas.

(7) Birth after birth I have one desire that I can serve
the lotus feet of the Six Gosvāmīs. I also desire that I
may always live in the association of all pure
Vaiṣṇavas.

(8) When the Six Gosvāmīs lived in Vraja they revealed
the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

(9) All should chant, “hari bol! hari bol!” and do
bhajana of Vṛndāvana, living in Vraja and always serving
Vṛndāvana. How? By majāiyā mana, by always absorbing the
heart in the service of guru and Vaiṣṇavas.

(10) Hoping to attain the cherished service of the lotus
feet of guru and Vaiṣṇavas, Narottama Ṭhākura is doing
nāma saṅkīrtana.




Jaya Jaya Harināma

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



jaya jaya harināma, cid-ānandāmṛta-dhāma,

para-tattva akṣar-ākāra

nija-jane kṛpā kori’, nāma-rūpe avatārī,

jīve doyā korile apāra (1)

All glories to the holy name, the storehouse of the
nectar of divine knowledge and bliss, who is none other
than the Supreme Truth, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. To shower
mercy on His devotees, He has descended in the form of
sound, showing vast compassion for all jīvas.

                             185
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017




jaya hari kṛṣṇa-nāma, jaga-jana-suviśrāma,

sarva-jana-mānasa rañjana,

muni-vṛnda nirantara, je nāmer samādara,

kori gāya bhoriyā vadana (2)

All glories to the many names of Hari and Kṛṣṇa. Śrī
Nāma is the sublime shelter for all living entities,
taking them out from the cycle of birth and death and
filling their hearts with delight. The munis sing the
holy names incessantly with great honor and joy.



ohe kṛṣṇa-nāmākṣara, tumi sarva-śakti-dhara,

jīvera kalyāṇa-vitaraṇe

tomā binā bhava-sindhu, uddhārite nāhi bandhu,

āsiyācho jīva-uddhāraṇe (3)

O syllables of kṛṣṇa-nāma, You possess all powers in
order to bestow auspiciousness upon the jīvas. Coming
for our deliverance, You are the sole friend to rescue
us from the ocean of birth and death.



āche tāpa jīve jata, tumi saba koro hata,

helāya tomāre eka-bāra

ḍāke yadi kaun jana, ho’ye dīna akiñcana,

nāhi dekhi anya pratikāra (4)

Whatever miseries are afflicting the jīvas, You fully
dispell if one even neglectfully chants Your name just
once, feeling himself insignificant and destitute and
seeing no other remedy for his relief.



tava svalpa-sphūrti pāya, ugra-tāpa dūre jāya,

liṅga-bhaṅga hoya anāyāse

bhakativinoda koya, jaya harināma jaya,

paḍe’ thāki tuwā pada-āśe (5)

A momentary vision of You makes all sorts of terrible
miseries disappear. The subtle body is easily destroyed
(and You establish the jīva in his svarūpa).
Bhaktivinoda says, “O Harināma, all glories to You. I
perpetually fall at Your lotus feet.”



                             186
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




Hari He! Tomāre Bhuliyā

Śaraṇāgati - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



hari he!

tomāre bhuliyā, avidyā-pīḍāya,

pīḍita rasanā mora

kṛṣṇa-nāma-sudhā, bhālo nāhi lāge,

viṣaya-sukhete bhora (1)

O my Lord Hari! Because I have forgotten You, my tongue
has become embittered with the disease of ignorance. I
cannot relish the sweet nectar of Your name Kṛṣṇa, for I
have become addicted to the taste of worldly pleasures.



prati-dina jadi, ādara koriyā,

se nāma kīrtana kori

sitapala jeno, nāśi’ roga-mūla,

krame svādu hoya, hari! (2)

If I sing that holy name of Yours aloud every day with
warm affection, then as sugar candy taken medicinally
destroys the very disease that makes it taste bitter
(jaundice), so Your holy name, O Lord Hari, will cure my
spiritual disease and allow me to gradually taste Your
sweetness.



durdaiva āmāra, se nāme ādara,

nā hoilo, doyāmoya!

daśa aparādha, āmāra durdaiva,

kemone hoibe kṣoya (3)

How great is my misfortune that I feel no appreciation
for Your holy name, O merciful Lord! In such a
lamentable state, how will I be freed from committing
the ten offenses to the holy name?



anudina jeno, tava nāma gāi,

kramete kṛpāya tava

aparādha jā’be, nāme ruci ha’be,


                           187
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

āsvādibo nāmāsava (4)

If I sing Your name every day, then gradually by Your
mercy the ten offenses will disappear, taste for Your
holy name will grow within me, and then I shall relish
the intoxicating nectar of that name.




Nagara Bhramiyā Āmāra Gaura



nagara bhramiyā āmāra gaura elo ghare

gaura elo ghare āmāra nitāi elo ghare (1)

After roaming through the towns and villages, my
Gaurāṅga and my Nityānanda came back home.



pāpī tāpī uddhāra diyā gaura elo ghare

pāpī tāpī uddhāra diyā nitāi elo ghare (2)

My Gaura-Nitāi magnanimously delivered so many sinners
suffering from the three-fold miseries and then came
home.



nāma prema bilāiya gaura elo ghare

nāma prema bilāiya nitāi elo ghare (3)

Roaming about, Gaura and Nitāi distributed prema through
harināma, and then They returned home.



dhūla jhari’ śacī-mātā gaura kole kore

dhūla jharī’ padmavatī nitāi kole kore (4)

Gaura’s body was covered with dust. Seeing this, Śacī
Mātā’s heart filled with gaura-prema. She removed the
dust and took Him on her lap. Similarly, Padmavatī Devī
removed the dust from Nitāi’s body and took Him in her
lap.



Harināma, Tuwā Aneka Svarūpa

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



harināma, tuwā aneka svarūpa, yaśodā-nandana,

ānanda-vardhana, nanda-tanaya rasa-kūpa (1)

                          188
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


O Harināma, you possess unlimited forms, such as
Yaśodā’s beloved son, He who increases the bliss of
Gokula, the son of Nanda, and the deep well of rasa.



pūtanā-ghātana, tṛṇabarta-hana, śakaṭa-bhañjana gopāla,

muralī-vadana, agha-baka-mardana, govardhana-dhārī
rākhāla (2)

You are the slayer of the Pūtanā and Tṛṇāvarta demons,
He who breaks the cart, the protector of the cows, the
player of the flute, the destroyer of the Agha and Baka
demons, the lifter of Govardhana Hill, and a cowherd
boy.



keśī-mardana, brahma-vimohana, surapati-darpa-vināśī,

ariṣṭa-śātana, gopī-vimohana, yamunā-pulina-vilāsī (3)

You kill the Keśī demon, bewilder Brahmā and break the
pride of Indra. You kill Ariṣtāsura, enchant all the
young gopīs, and perform playful pastimes along the
banks of the Yamunā.



rādhikā-rañjana, rāsa-rasāyana, rādhā-kuṇḍa-kuñja-bihārī

rāma, kṛṣṇa, hari, mādhava, narahari, matsyādi-gaṇe
avatārī (4)

You delight Śrīmatī Rādhikā and bring the nectar of life
to the rāsa dance. You enjoy in the kuñjas at Rādhā-
kuṇḍa. You are the reservoir of pleasure, attractive to
all beings. You remove inauspiciousness and are the
husband of the goddess of fortune, the half-man half-
lion Nṛsiṁhadeva, and the source of all the other
incarnations beginning with the fish Matsya.



govinda, vāmana, śrī-madhusūdana, yādava-candra,
vanamālī

kālīya-śātana, gokula-rañjana, rādhā-bhajana-sukha-śalī
(5)

You give pleasure to the cows. You are the dwarf
brāhmaṇa incarnation, the slayer of the Madhu demon, the
moon of the Yadu dynasty. You wear beautiful garlands of
fresh forest flowers, punish the Kālīya serpent, give
delight to Gokula, and rejoice in the worship of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.



ity ādika nāma, svarūpe prakāma, bāḍuka mora rati rāge,

rūpa-svarūpa-pada, jāni’nija sampada, bhaktivinoda

                          189
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

dhori’ māge (6)

Understanding your glories, Bhaktivinoda clasps the
lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa and Svarūpa and prays, “O
Harināma, by Your sweet will You manifest in all these
forms and in many others. Please let my love and
attachment for Them grow.”




Bol Hari Bol


Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



bol hari bol hari hari hari bol govinda mādhava gopāla
bol



manera ānande o bhāi bol hari bol

janame janame sukhe bol hari bol (1)

O my brothers, with joy in your hearts chant “Hari!”
Chant!

Birth after birth happily chant “Hari!” Chant!



mānaba-janma pe’ye o bhāi bol hari bol

sukhe thāko duḥkhe thāko bol hari bol (2)

O my brothers, now that you have attained this human
birth, chant, “Hari!” Chant! In happiness or in
distress, chant “Hari!” Chant!



sampade bipade o bhāi bol hari bol

gṛhe thāko bane thāko bol hari bol

kṛṣṇera soṁsāre thāki’ bol hari bol (3)

O my brothers, in good fortune or in calamity, chant
“Hari!” Chant!

Whether you are a gṛhasta at home or a sannyāsī in the
forest, chant “Hari!” Chant!

Carry on your worldly duties but in relation to Kṛṣṇa,
and chant “Hari!” Chant!



asat-saṅga chāri’ o bhāi bol hari bol


                          190
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

baiṣṇaba-caraṇe pori’ bol hari bol (4)

Shun the wicked, O my brothers, and chant “Hari!” Chant!

Falling at the feet of the Vaiṣṇavas, chant “Hari!”
Chant!




Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Bol

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



rādhā-kṛṣṇa bol bol bolo re sobāi

(ei) śikhā diyā, sab nadīyā phirche nece’ gaura-nitāi

(miche) māyāra bośe, jāccho bhese, khāccho hābuḍubu,
bhāi (1)

Everyone, chant, chant, chant ‘Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.’ Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Nityānanda Prabhu are dancing,
roaming throughout Navadvīpa and instructing all. O
brothers! All of you chant this holy name of Radhā-
Kṛṣṇa. You have uselessly come under the control of
māyā, sometimes floating and sometimes drowning in the
ocean of material happiness and distress.



(jīva) kṛṣṇa-dāsa, e viśvāsa, korle to’ ār duḥkho nāi

(kṛṣṇa) bolbe jabe, pulaka ha’be jhorbe āṅkhi, boli tāi
(2)

But if you have faith that the jīva is a servant of
Kṛṣṇa, you will have no more sorrows. Then if you utter
kṛṣṇa-nāma, your body will shiver in ecstasy and tears
will flow from your eyes.



(rādhā) kṛṣṇa bolo, saṅge calo, ei-mātra bhikṣā cāi

(jaya) sakala bipod bhaktivinoda bolena, jakhon o-nāma
gāi (3)

Bhaktivinoda says, “O brothers! Chant rādhā-kṛṣṇa-nāma
with the Vaiṣṇavas. This is all I beg of you. When you
chant Their names, all dangers will fly far away.”




Bhajo Gaurāṅga




                          191
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

bhajo gaurāṅga kaho gaurāṅga

laho gaurāṅger nāma re

Worship Gaurāṅga, talk about Gaurāṅga. Oh! Chant the
name of my Gaurāṅga.



je jana gaurāṅga bhaje

sei hoya amāra prāṇa he

Those who serve Gaurāṅga’s name (i.e., Guru and
Vaiṣṇavas) are my life and soul.




Nadīyā-Godrume

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



nadīyā-godrume nityānanda mahājana

pātiyāche nāma-haṭṭa jīvera kāraṇa (1)

In the land of Nadīyā, on the island of Godruma, the
magnanimous Nityānanda Prabhu has opened a marketplace
of the holy name for the deliverance of all fallen
souls.

(śraddhāvān jan he, śraddhāvān jan he)

prabhur ājñāy, bhāi, māgi ei bhikhā

bolo kṛṣṇa, bhajo kṛṣṇa, koro kṛṣṇa-sikhā (2)

There He calls out, “O men of faith! On the order of Śrī
Gaurāṅga, O brothers, I beg you: Chant ‘Kṛṣṇa!’ Serve
and worship Kṛṣṇa, and follow His teachings.



aparādha-śūnya ho’ye loha kṛṣṇa-nāma

kṛṣṇa mātā, kṛṣṇa pitā, kṛṣṇa dhana-prāṇa (3)

Being free of offense, chant the holy names of Kṛṣṇa.
Kṛṣṇa is our mother, our father and the treasure of our
life.



kṛṣṇera saṁsāra koro chāḍi’ anācār

jīve doyā, kṛṣṇa-nāma—sarva-dharma-sāra (4)

Carry on your worldly duties but in relation to Kṛṣṇa,
and give up sinful behavior. Show compassion to all
fallen souls by loudly chanting the holy name of Krṣṇa—

                          192
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

this is the essence of all forms of religion.



Gāy Gorā Madhura Svare

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



gāy gorā madhura svare

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare (1)

Śrī Gaurasundara sings in a very sweet voice: Hare Kṛṣṇa
Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare / Hare Rāma Hare Rāma
Rāma Rāma Hare Hare.



gṛhe thāko, vane thāko, sadā ‘hari’ bole’ ḍāko,

sukhe duḥkhe bhulo nā’ko, vadane hari-nāma koro re (2)

Whether you are a householder or sannyāsī, constantly
chant, “Hari! Hari!” Do not forget this chanting,
whether you are in a happy condition or a distressful
one. Just fill your lips with harināma.



māyā-jāle baddha ho’ye, ācho miche kāja lo’ye,

ekhano cetana pe’ye, ‘rādhā-mādhava’ nāma bolo re (3)

You are bound up in the network of māyā and are forced
to toil fruitlessly. Now you have obtained full
consciousness, so chant the names of Rādhā-Mādhava.



jīvana hoilo śeṣa, nā bhojile hṛṣikeśa

bhaktivinodopadeśa, ekbāra nāma-rase māto re (4)

Your life may end at any moment, and you have not served
the Lord of the senses, Hrṣikeśa. Take this advice of
Bhaktivinoda: “Just once, relish the nectar of the holy
name!”




Nārada Muni

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



nārada muni, bājāya bīṇā, ‘rādhikā-ramaṇa’ nāme


                          193
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

nāma amani, udita hoya, bhakata-gīta-sāme (1)

The supremely rasika Nārada Muni plays his vina, singing
the names of Śrī Rādhikā-Ramaṇa. Hearing this kīrtana,
nāmī Śrī Rādhikā-Ramaṇa Themselves immediately descend,
dancing and tasting the bhāva of Their own devotees.



amiya-dhārā, bariṣe ghana, śravaṇa-yugale giyā

bhakata-jana, saghane nāce, bhoriyā āpana hiyā (2)

Like a heavy downpour, a flood of nectar in the form of
Their holy names enters the devotees’ ears, causing
their hearts to expand with joy, and they also begin to
dance.



mādhurī-pūra, āsabo paśi, mātāya jagata-jane

keho vā kāṅde, keho vā nāce, keho māte mane mane (3)

Upon drinking through the ears this inebriating nectar,
all beings in the whole universe become maddened—some
weep, some dance and others become fully intoxicated
within their minds.



pañca-vadana, nārade dhori, premera saghana rolo

kamalāsana, nāciyā bole, “bolo bolo hari bolo” (4)

Five-faced Lord Śiva embraces Nārada and, filled with
prema, loudly sings the holy name while Brahmājī
enthusiastically begins to dance and calls out,
«Haribol! Haribol!»



sahasrānana, parama-sukhe, ‘hari hari’ boli’ gāya

nāma-prabhāve, mātilo viśva, nāma-rasa sabe pāya (5)

Thousand-faced Śeṣanāgajī, feeling supreme happiness,
sings out, “Hari! Hari!” By the astonishing influence of
nāma, the whole universe becomes maddened and all taste
the wonderful rasa of the holy name.



śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma, rasane sphuri’, pūrā ‘lo āmāra āśa

śrī-rūpa-pade, jācaye ihā, bhakativinoda-dāsa (6)

This servant Bhaktivinoda prays to the lotus feet of Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī, “May the holy name manifest on my tongue,
thus fulfilling all my desires.”




                          194
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


Soi (Sakhi), Kebā Sunāili Śyāma-Nāma

Śrī Caṇḍidāsa



soi (sakhi), kebā sunāili śyāma-nāma

kānera bhītāra diyā, marame paśilo go

ākula korilo mora prāṇa (1)

Oh, my dear sakhī! Who is that person who first made Me
hear this name ‘Śyāma’? When it enters My heart through
My ears, my life airs get agitated.



na jāni kateka madhu, śyāma-nāme āche go

vadana chāḍite nāhi pāri (2)

I don’t know how much sweetness fills this name. It is
so sweet that My tongue will not leave it for a moment.



japite japite nāma, avaśa korilo go

kemone pāibo soi, tāre (3)

As I go on repeating this name, I become completely
absorbed. O sakhī! How will I ever be able to meet Him?



nāma-paratape jāra, aichana korilo go

aṅgera paraśe kibā hoya (4)

If that person’s name alone has the power to put Me in
such a condition, I cannot even imagine what My
condition would be if I were to touch His body.



jekhāne vasati tāra, sekhāne thākhiya go

juvatī dharama kaiche raya (5)

Wherever He stays, how can the young women maintain
their religious principles?



pāśarite cāhi mane, pāśarā na jāya go

ki koribe ki habe upāya (6)

In My heart I want to forget Him, but I cannot. Now I
cannot understand what is the remedy, what to do.



                             195
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


kahe dvija-caṇḍidāse, kulavatī kula-nāśe

apanāre jauvana jācāya (7)

Dvija Caṇḍidāsa says, “Simply by displaying His youthful
beauty, that Śyāmānanda has destroyed the chastity of
all virtuous women.”




Mama Mana Mandire

discovered by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhakura



Refrain: mama mana mandire raha niśi-din

kṛṣṇa murāri śrī kṛṣṇa murāri

O Kṛṣṇa Murāri, day and night You should dwell in the
temple of my heart, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Murāri.

bhakti prīti mālā candana

tumi nio he nio cita-nandana (1)

Devotion, love, flower garlands, and sandalwood--please
accept, O please accept them, Delighter of the Heart!



jīvana maraṇa tava pūjā nivedana

sundara he mana-hāri (2)

In life or in death I worship You with these offerings,
Beautiful One, O Enchanter of the Heart!



eso nanda-kumār āra nanda-kumār

habe prema-pradīpe ārati tomār (3)

Come, Son of Nanda, and then O Son of Nanda I will offer
Your ārati ceremony with the lamplight of my love.



nayana yamunā jhare anibāra

tomāra virahe giridhārī (4)

The waters of the Yamunā River cascade incessantly from
my eyes in Your separation, O Holder of Govardhana Hill!



vandana gāne tava bajuka jīvana


                             196
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa murāri śrī kṛṣṇa murāri (5)

May I pass my life absorbed only in songs of Your
praise, O Kṛṣṇa Murāri, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Murāri!



Prasāda-Sevāya

Songs for Honoring Spiritual Food



mahā-prasāde govinde

nāma-brahmaṇi vaiṣṇave

svalpa-puṇyavatāṁ rājan

viśvāso naiva jāyate

(Caitanya Caritāmṛta Antya-lila 16.96 (purport) – from
Skanda Purāṇa)

Those who have very few pious activities to their credit
can never develop faith in mahāprasāda, in Śrī Govinda,
in the holy name of the Lord, or in the Vaiṣṇavas.




Śarīra Avidyā-Jāl

Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



bhāi re! śarīra avidyā-jāl joḍendriya tāhe kāl,

jīve phele viṣaya-sāgore

tā’ra madhye jihwā ati, lobhamoya sudurmati,

tā’ke jetā kaṭhina saṁsāre (1)

O Brother, this material body is a lump of ignorance,
and the senses are a network of paths leading to death.
We have fallen into this ocean of material sense
enjoyment—of all the senses the tongue is the most
difficult to control, being always greedy to taste
things.



kṛṣṇa boro doyāmoya, koribāre jihwā jaya,

swa-prasād-anna dilo bhāi

sei annāmṛta pāo, rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa gāo,

preme ḍāko caitanya-nitāi (2)

But Brother, Kṛṣṇa is so merciful that He gives us His

                            197
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

prasāda, the remnants from His own mouth, to help us
conquer the tongue. This prasāda is full of nectar.
Honoring this prasāda, sing the glories of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, and with love call for the help of Caitanya-
Nitāi.




Ārati Kīrtanas




Śrī Gurudeva Ārati


Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja



jaya jaya gurudeva bhakati prajñāna

parama mohana-rūpa ārtta-vimocana (1)

All glories, all glories to our divine master, Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja, whose supremely
charming figure is the shelter for suffering humanity...



mūrttimanta śrī-vedānta aśubha-nāśana

“bhakti grantha śrī-vedānta” taba vighoṣaṇa (2)

...who is the very embodiment of Vedānta, who is the
annihilator of everything inauspicious, and who boldly
declared that Śrī Vedānta is essentially a book of
bhakti.



vedānta samiti-dīpe śrī-siddhānta-jyoti

ārati tomāra tāhe haya niravadhi (3)

Upon the lamp of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, the
splendid light of śāstrīya-siddhānta burns, and with
that lamp your ārati is perpetually performed.



śrī-vinoda-dhārā-taile dīpa prapūrita

rūpānuga-dhūpe daśa-dika āmodita (4)

That lamp is filled with the oil of Bhaktivinoda-dhārā—
the current of the teachings flowing from Bhaktivinoda—
and teachings of the followers of Śrī Rūpa are the
incense which delights the ten directions with its sweet
fragrance.


                          198
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



sarva-śāstra-sugambhīra karuṇā-komala

yugapat suśobhana vadana-kamala (5)

His lotus face simultaneously radiates stern gravity
rooted in his profound realization of all the śāstras
and softness born of his deep compassion.



svarṇa-kānti vinindita śrī-aṅga śobhana

yati-vāsa paridhāne jagat-kalyāṇa (6)

The luster of his beautiful bodily limbs, dressed in the
robes of renunciation for the welfare of the entire
creation, vanquishes the effulgence of molten gold.



nānā chānde sajjana cāmara ḍhulāya

gaura-jana ucca-kaṇṭhe sumadhura gāya (7)

With many moods Śrī Sajjana¹ fans him with a cāmara
while Śrī Gaura-nārāyaṇa² sings very sweetly at the top
of his voice.



sumaṅgala nīrājana kare bhakta-gaṇa

dūramati dūra haite dekhe trivikrama (8)

From a distance the foolish Trivikrama beholds the
devotees performing this immensely auspicious ārati.



1. Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja’s name before accepting
sannyāsa.

2. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s name before accepting
sannyāsa.




Maṅgala Ārati


Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja



maṅgala śrī guru-gaura maṅgala mūrati

maṅgala śrī rādhā-kṛṣṇa yugala pīriti (1)

Glories to the auspicious forms of Śrī Guru and Gaura,
and all glories to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s auspicious amorous

                          199
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

love.



maṅgala niśānta līlā maṅgala udaye

maṅgala ārati jāge bhakata hṛdaye (2)

All glories to Their auspicious niśānta-līlā which
heralds the end of night and Their auspicious awakening,
bringing auspiciouness to all! Glories to maṅgala-arati
which awakens a sphūrti of that niśānta-līlā within the
devotees’ hearts!



tomara nidrāya jīva nidrita dharāya

tava jāgarane viśva jāgarita haya (3)

While You sleep, the jīvas lie sleeping deep in their
ignorance, but upon Your rising, the whole world
awakens! [Meaning, if You manifest in their hearts, then
all tattva and all siddhānta will be revealed to them.]



śubha dṛṣṭi koro ebe (prabhu) jagatera prati

jāguka hṛdaye mora sumaṅgalā rati (4)

(Prabhu!) Shower Your kind glance upon the world now.
Awaken in my heart that most auspicious rati.



mayūra śukādi sāri kata pikarāja

maṅgala jāgara hetu kariche virāja (5)

The peacocks, parrots, śuka, sāri, and cuckoos (by
Vṛndā-devī’s order) are singing the reasons for Your
auspicious awakening.



sumadhura dhvani kore jata śākhī-gaṇa

maṅgala śravaṇe bāje madhura kūjana (6)

Sitting on the branches of the trees, all the birds sing
their supremely sweet morning melodies which resound
throughout the forest. Those sweet, soft, auspicious
sounds come and grace everyone!



kusumita sarovare kamala-hillola

maṅgala saurabha bahe pavana kallola (7)

In the pond, which is filled with many varieties of
flowers, the lotuses sway in the center. The breezes
spread their auspicious aromas in all directions,

                          200
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

bringing pure delight and joy to all.



jhāñjhara kāṁsara ghaṇṭā śaṅkha karatāla

maṅgala mṛdaṅga bāje parama rasāla (8)

Large cymbals, gongs, bells, conches, karatālas and
auspicious mṛdaṅgas play the supreme rasa.



maṅgala ārati kare bhakatera gaṇa

abhāgā keśava (śrī keśavera dāsa) kore nāma-saṅkīrtana
(9)

Performing maṅgala ārati within the company of devotees,
the unfortunate Keśava (the servants of Srī Keśava)
sings nāma-saṅkīrtana.




Śrīla Prabhupāda Ārati


Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja



jaya jaya prabhupādera ārati nehārī

yoga-māyāpura-nitya-sebā-dānakārī (1)

All glories, all glories to the ārati ceremony of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda, which bestows
eternal service at the Yoga-pīṭha in Māyāpura upon those
who observe it.



sarvatra pracāra-dhūpa saurabha manohara

baddha mukta alikula mugdha carācara (2)

The enchanting fragrance of the incense spreads
everywhere, just like his preaching which astonishes all
liberated and conditioned devotees, as well as all
moving and non-moving jīvas.



bhakati-siddhānta-dīpa jāliyā jagate

pañca-rasa-sevā-śikhā pradīpta tāhāte (3)

He lit up the entire world with the lamp of the perfect
conclusions of śuddha-bhakti. This lamp is composed of
five brilliantly glowing flames which represent service
in the five primary rasas.


                          201
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



pañca mahādīpa yathā pañca mahājyotiḥ

triloka-timira-nāśe avidyā durmati (4)

Those five radiant lights destroy the darkness of
ignorance and crooked intelligence throughout the three
worlds.



bhakati-vinoda-dhārā jala śaṅkha-dhāra

niravadhi bahe tāhā rodha nāhi āra (5)

The water in the ārati conchshell is the conception of
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura which flows continuously and
which cannot be checked by anyone.



sarva-vādya-mayī ghanṭā bāje sarva-kāla

bṛhat-mṛdaṅga-vādya parama rasāla (6)

Kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, which is accompanied by karatālas, bells,
and other instruments, resounds for all time in all
directions, but really it is the printing press, known
as the bṛhat-mṛdaṅga, which distributes the supreme
rasa.



viśāla-lalāṭe śobhe tilaka ujjvala

gala-deśe tulasī-mālā kare jhalamala (7)

Resplendent tilaka adorns his broad forehead, and around
his neck a necklace of tulasī beads shines.



ajānu-lambita-bāhu dīrgha kalevara

tapta kāñcana-baraṇa parama sundara (8)

With his long arms extending to his knees, his towering
figure, and his complexion like molten gold, he is
supremely beautiful.



lalita-lāvaṇya mukhe sneha-bharā hāsī

aṅga kānti śobhe jaiche nitya pūrṇa śaśī (9)

His charming, lovely face displays a smile which is full
of affection, and the beauty of his bodily complexion is
like a perpetually full moon.



yati-dharme paridhāne aruṇa-vasana

                          202
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


mukta kaila meghāvṛta gauḍīya gagana (10)

Attired in daybreak-coloured cloth which signifies the
religious principles of sannyāsa, he nullified the
misconceptions which were like clouds covering the clear
Gauḍīya sky and established the doctrine of pure bhakti.



bhakati-kusume kata kuñja viracita

saundarye-saurabhe tāra viśva āmodita (11)

His many temples are like luxuriant kuñjas filled with
aromatic bhakti flowers (his bhaktas). By their
preaching they spread the beauty and fragrance of these
kuñjas throughout the entire universe to the delight of
all.



sevādarśe narahari cāmara ḍhūlāya

keśava ati ānande nirājana gāya (12)

As Narahari Prabhu, the ideal servant, fans Śrīla
Prabhupāda with a cāmara, with great delight Keśava dāsa
sings this ārati song.




Śrī Gaura-Ārati


Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



(see additions for refrains)



jaya jaya gorācāndera āratiko śobhā

jāhnavī-taṭa-vane jaga-mano-lobhā (1)

All glories, all glories to the beautiful ārati of Śrī
Gaurāṅga being performed in a forest on the banks of the
Jāhnavī (Gaṅgā), attracting the minds and hearts of all.



dakhiṇe nitāi-cānda bāme gadādhara

nikate advaita śrīnivāsa chatra-dhara (2)

On the right of Gaurāṅga is the moonlike Nityānanda
Prabhu (nitāi-cānda), on the left is Gadādhara Paṇḍita,
and on the sides are Advaita Prabhu and Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita,
who holds the umbrella.


                          203
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



bosiyāche gorācānda ratna-siṁhāsane

ārati karena brahmā-ādi deva-gaṇe (3)

Śrī Gaurāṅga is seated on a jeweled throne. Brahmā is
performing the ārati along with other demigods.



narahari-ādi kori’ cāmara ḍhulāya

sañjaya-mukunda-vāsu ghoṣa-ādi gāya (4)

Narahari Sarakāra Ṭhākura and others fan with cāmaras as
many others like Sañjaya Paṇḍita, Mukunda Daṭṭa, and
Vāsudeva Ghoṣa sing songs.



śaṅkha bāje ghaṇṭā bāje bāje karatāla

madhura mṛdaṅga bāje parama rasāla (5)

The sounds of the conch, bell, and karatālas mix with
the sweet sound of the mṛdaṅgas, producing the most
relishable ambrosia for the ears.



bahu-koṭi candra jini’ vadana ujjvala

gala-deśe vana-mālā kore jhalamala (6)

Śrī Gaurāṅga’s brilliant face conquers the glow of many
millions of moons, and the garland of forest flowers
about His neck splendorously shines.



śiva-śuka-nārada preme gada-gada

bhakativinoda dekhe gorāra sampada (7)

Śiva, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and Nārada Muni’s voices have
become choked up with prema. Thus, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
is seeing the glories of Śrī Gaurāṅga.




Śrī Yugala-Ārati


Gītāvalī - Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



jaya jaya rādhā-kṛṣṇa yugala-milana

ārati koroye lalitādi sakhī-gaṇa (1)


                          204
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

All glories, all glories to the amorous rendezvous of
Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa Yugala! All sakhīs led by Lalitā and
her group perform ārati for Their pleasure.



madana-mohana-rūpa tri-bhaṅga-sundara

pītāmbara śikhi-puccha-cuḍā manohara (2)

In His beautiful three-fold bending madana-mohana form,
He is so attractive, even to Cupid. With His yellow silk
dhoti and crown decorated with peacock feathers, He
captivates the minds of all.



lalita-mādhava-bāme vṛṣabhānu-kanyā

nīla-vasanā gaurī rūpe guṇe dhanyā (3)

To the left of the amorous and charming Śrī Mādhava is
the beautiful daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, dressed in a sārī the color of a blue lotus.
Her complexion is the color of molten gold and Her
beauty and qualities are matchless.



nānā-vidha alaṅkāra kore jhalamala

hari-mano-vimohana vadana ujjvala (4)

She is adorned with various sparkling, shimmering
ornaments (alaṅkāras), enchanting the mind of Hari with
Her radiant face.



viśākhādi sakhī-gaṇa nānā rāge gāya

priya-narma-sakhī jata cāmara ḍhulāya (5)

Viśākhā leads all the sakhīs in singing various rāgas
(melodious songs according to the appropriate time of
the day), as all the other priya-narma-sakhīs soothe Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with cāmara fans.



śrī rādhā-mādhava-pada-sarasija-āśe

bhakativinoda sakhī-pade sukhe bhāse (6)

At the feet of the damsels of Vraja-dhāma lies an ocean
of joy. There Bhaktivinoda Thākura swims, hoping to
attain the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā and Mādhava.




Śrī Tulasī Parikramā and Ārati


                          205
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī



namo namaḥ tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ)

rādhā-kṛṣṇa nitya-sevā – ei abhilāṣī (1)

O Śrīmatī Tulasī-devī! Desiring to enter the eternal
service of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, I repeatedly offer
praṇāma to you, who are so dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



je tomāra śaraṇa loya, sei kṛṣṇa sevā pāya,

kṛpā kori koro tāre vṛndāvana-vāsī

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (2)

One who takes shelter of you attains the service of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Being merciful, you make him a resident of
Vṛndāvana.



tomāra caraṇe dhori, more anugata kori,

gaurahari-sevā-magna rākho divā niśi

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (3)

Allow me to catch hold of your lotus feet. May you make
me your intimate follower, and day and night keep me
immersed in the service of Śrī Gaurahari.



dīnera ei abhilāṣa, māyāpure dio vāsa,

aṅgete mākhibo sadā dhāma dhūli rāśi

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (4)

I am fallen but I desire that you make me a resident of
Māyāpura where I will always smear the dust of the dhāma
on my body.



tomāra ārati lāgi, dhūpa, dīpa, puṣpa māgi,

mahimā bākhāni ebe hao more khuśī

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (5)

Performing your ārati with incense, ghee lamp, and
flowers, I will derive great happiness from describing
your glories.



jagatera jata phūla, kabhu nahe samatula,

                          206
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017


sarva-tyaji kṛṣṇa tava patra mañjarī vilāsī

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (6)

Of all the flowers within the universe, none is your
equal for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, putting aside all of them, performs
pastimes only with your leaves and mañjarīs.



ogo vṛnde mahārāṇī! kṛṣṇa bhakti pradāyinī!

tomāra pādapa-tale, deva-ṛṣi kutūhale,

sarva-tīrtha loye tārā hana adhivāsī

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (7)

O Vṛnde Mahārāṇī! Bestower of kṛṣṇa-bhakti! All the
demigods, sages, and holy places joyfully reside at your
feet.



śrī keśava ati dīna, sādhana-bhajana-hīna,

tomāra āśraye sadā nāmānande bhāsi

tulasī kṛṣṇa-preyasī (namo namaḥ) (8)

Devoid of sādhana-bhajana, Śrī Keśava takes shelter of
you and attains unbroken nāmānanda.




Śrī Tulasī-Kīrtana




namo namaḥ tulasī! kṛṣṇa-preyasī

(vraje) rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevā pābo ei abhilāṣī (1)

O Tulasī, beloved of Kṛṣṇa, I repeatedly offer praṇāma
to you. My cherished desire is to attain the sevā of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala-kiśora.



je tomāra śaraṇa loya, tara vāñchā pūrṇa hoy

kṛpā kori’ koro tāre vṛndāvana-bāsī (2)

All the desires of whoever takes shelter of you are
fulfilled. Being so merciful, you grant him residence in
Vṛndāvana.



mora ei abhilāṣa, vilāsa kuñje dio vāsa

                          207
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


nayane heribo sadā jugala-rūpa-rāśi (3)

I intensely desire that you please make me a resident of
the pleasure groves (vilāsa-kuñja) of Śrī Vṛndāvana.
Then I will be able to behold the beautiful pastimes of
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.



ei nivedana dharo, sakhīra anugata koro

sevā-adhikāra diye koro nija dāsī (4)

I am presenting my heart-felt prayer that you make me a
follower of the sakhīs, thus giving me the privilege of
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s sevā and making me your own maidservant.



dīna kṛṣṇa-dāse koya, ei jena mora hoy

śrī-rādhā-govinda-preme sadā jena bhāsi (5)

This fallen Kṛṣṇadāsa begs to always bathe in the prema
for Śrī Rādhā and Govinda.




Bhoga-Ārati


Gītāvalī -Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



bhaja bhakata-vatsala śrī-gaurahari

śrī-gaurahari so hī goṣṭha-bihārī,

nanda-yaśomatī-citta-hārī (1)

Just worship Śrī Gaurahari, who is always affectionate
towards His devotees. He is none other than Kṛṣṇa, who
roamed with the cows from forest to forest, and who
stole the hearts of Nanda and Yaśodā.



belā ho’lo, dāmodara, āisa ekhano

bhoga-mandire bosi’ koraho bhojana (2)

Yaśodā Maiyā calls, “O Dāmodara, it is very late. Please
come right now. Sit down to take Your meal in the dining
pavilion (bhoga-mandira).



nandera nideśe baise giri-bara-dhārī

baladeva-saha sakhā baise sāri sāri (3)

                          208
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017


Upon Nanda Baba’s order, Kṛṣṇa, who lifted Govardhana
Hill, sits down. Then all the sakhās along with Baladeva
sit down in rows to take their lunch.



śuktā-śākādi bhāji nālitā kuṣmāṇḍa

ḍāli ḍālnā dugdha-tumbī dadhi mocā-khaṇḍa (4)

They are served a feast of śuktā and various kinds of
green leafy vegetables, then nice fried things, and a
salad made of jute leaves. They are also served pumpkin,
baskets of fruit, squash cooked in milk with sugar (luk-
lauki), thick yoghurt, and banana-flower sabjī.



mudga-baḍā māṣa-baḍā roṭikā ghṛtānna

śaṣkulī piṣṭaka kṣīra pulī pāyasānna (5)

Then they are given fried mung and urad dahl patties,
capātīs, and rice with ghee. Next, sweets made with
milk, sugar, and sesame, rice-flour pancakes, thick
condensed milk, sweet rolls, and sweet rice.



karpūra amṛta-keli rambhā khīra-sāra

amṛta rasālā, amla dvādaśa prakāra (6)

There is amṛta-keli scented with camphor which is so
tasteful and more than sweet. There is sweet rice cooked
with bananas, and also amṛta rasālā. They are also
served twelve kinds of sour preparations made with
tamarinds, tomatoes, limes, lemons, oranges, and
pomegranates.



luci cini sarpurī lāḍḍu rasābalī

bhojana korena kṛṣṇa ho’ye kutūhalī (7)

There are purīs with sugar, purīs filled with cream,
lāḍḍus, and dahl patties boiled in sugar-water. Kṛṣṇa
very joyfully eats all of the preparations.



rādhikāra pakka anna vividha byañjana

parama ānande kṛṣṇa korena bhojana (8)

In supreme bliss Kṛṣṇa takes the rice, various curried
vegetables, and sweets cooked by Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī.



chale-bale lāḍḍu khāy śrī-madhumaṅgala


                          209
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

bagala bājāy āra deya hari-bolo (9)

Kṛṣṇa’s funny brāhmaṇa friend Madhumaṅgala, who is very
fond of lāḍḍus, gets them by hook or by crook. As he
eats a lāḍḍu, he makes a funny sound by slapping his
hand under his armpit and calls out, “Give me more!
Haribol!”



rādhikādi gaṇe heri’ nayanera koṇe

tṛpta ho’ye khāy kṛṣṇa yaśodā-bhavane (10)

Beholding Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Her sakhīs out of the
corners of His eyes, Kṛṣṇa takes His lunch at Yaśodā
Maiyā’s house with great satisfaction.

[Break here to offer to Gurudeva and Vrajavāsīs]



bhojanānte piye kṛṣṇa subāsita bāri

sabe mukha prakṣāloya ho’ye sāri sāri (11)

After lunch Kṛṣṇa drinks rose-scented water. Then all
the sakhās, standing in lines, wash their mouths.



hasta-mukha prakṣāliyā jata sakhā-gaṇe

ānande viśrāma kore baladeva sane (12)

After washing their hands and mouths, all the sakhās
take rest in great bliss with Baladeva.



jāmbula rasāla āne tāmbūla-masālā

tāhā kheye kṛṣṇa-candra sukhe nidrā gelā (13)

Then the sakhās Jāmbula and Rasāla bring Kṛṣṇa spiced
betel nuts. After chewing that Kṛṣṇacandra happily goes
to sleep.



viśālākṣa śikhi-puccha-cāmara ḍhulāya

apūrba śayyāya kṛṣṇa sukhe nidrā jāya (14)

While Kṛṣṇa contentedly sleeps on His beautiful bed, His
servant Viśālākṣa cools Him, sometimes with a peacock-
feather fan and sometimes with a camara.



yaśomatī-ājña pe’ye dhaniṣṭhā-ānīto

śrī-kṛṣṇa-prasāda rādhā bhuñje ho’ye prīto (15)


                          210
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Upon Yaśodā Maiyā’s request, Dhaniṣṭha brings the
remnants of food left on Kṛṣṇa’s plate to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, who takes them with great delight.



lalitādi sakhī-gaṇa avaśeṣa pāya

mane mane sukhe rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa gāya (16)

Receiving Her remnants, Lalitā-devī and all the other
sakhīs, very deeply overjoyed, sing the glories of
Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa.



hari-līlā ek-mātra jāhāra pramoda

bhogārati gāy ṭhākura bhakativinoda (17)

Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda, who finds joy only in the pastimes
of Hari, sings this Bhoga-ārati song!




Sanskrit Songs




Śrī Maṅgala-gītam

Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī



Refrain: rādhe-kṛṣṇa govinda gopāla nanda-dulāla yaśodā-
dulāla

jaya jaya deva! hare



śrita-kamalākuca-maṇḍala! dhṛta-kuṇḍala! e

kalita-lalita-vanamālā! jaya jaya deva! hare (1)

O You who take shelter at the breasts of sarva-lakṣmī-
mayī Śrīmatī Rādhikā! O You who wear fish-shaped
earrings and a charming garland of forest flowers! Deva!
Hare! All glories to You!

dina-maṇi-maṇḍala-maṇḍana! bhava-khaṇḍana e

muni-jana-mānasa-haṁsa! jaya jaya deva! hare (2)

O You who are the supreme ornament of the entire solar
system! O You who sever the bondage of the material
world! O swan who delightfully wanders on the pond of
the thoughtful sages’ minds! Deva! Hare! All glories to
You!

                          211
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017




kālīya-viṣa-dhara-gañjana! jana-rañjana! e

yadu-kula-nalina-dineśa! jaya jaya deva! hare (3)

O vanquisher of the poisonous Kālīya’s arrogance and
enchanter of the Vrajavāsīs! O You are the sun who
causes the lotus flower of the Yadu dynasty to bloom!
Deva! Hare! All glories to You!



madhu-mura-naraka-vināśana! garuḍāsana! e

sura-kula-keli-nidāna! jaya jaya deva! hare (4)

O destroyer of the Madhu, Mura, and Naraka demons! O You
who sit upon Garuḍa! O original cause of the demigods’
delight! Deva! Hare! All glories to You!



amala-kamala-dala-locana! bhava-mocana! e

tri-bhuvana-bhavana-nidhāna! jaya jaya deva! hare (5)

O You whose large eyes are like spotless lotus petals
and who liberate souls from the material world! O
foundation of the three worlds! Deva! Hare! All glories
to You!



janaka-sutā-kṛta-bhūṣaṇa! jita-dūṣaṇa! e

samara-śamita-daśakaṇṭha! jaya jaya deva! hare (6)

O You who in Rāma-līlā were ornamented by the daughter
of Janaka, who conquered the demon Dūṣaṇa and defeated
the ten-headed Rāvaṇa in battle! Deva! Hare! All glories
to You!



abhinava-jaladhara-sundara! dhṛta-mandara! e

śrī-mukha-candra-cakora! jaya jaya deva! hare (7)

He Śyāmasundara, Your beauty is like that of a fresh
raincloud! O You who held up Girirāja (Mandara
Mountain)! O cakora bird, You are enamoured with the
moon of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s face! Deva! Hare! All glories
to You!



tava caraṇe praṇatā vayam iti bhāvaya e

kuru kuśalaṁ praṇateṣu jaya jaya deva! hare (8)

O Prabhu, You remove Jayadeva’s tribulations! We
devotees who have fallen at Your feet implore You to

                          212
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

please bestow auspiciousness upon us!



śrī-jayadeva-kaver idaṁ kurute mudam

maṅgalam-ujjvala-gītaṁ jaya jaya deva! hare (9)

He Deva! May this brilliantly shining, auspicious song
composed by the poet Jayadeva always bring pleasure to
You and also to Your devotees who sing and hear it.
Deva! Hare! All glories to You!



Śrī Daśāvatāra-Stotram

Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī



pralaya-payodhi-jale dhṛtavān asi vedaṁ

vihita-vahitra-caritram akhedam

keśava! dhṛta-mīna-śarīra! jaya jagadīśa! hare (1)

O Keśava! O You who assume the form of a fish! O
Jagadīśa! O You who remove Your devotees’ tribulations!
All glories to You, because in the waters of the
universal dissolution You killed the demon Hayagriva and
rescued the Vedas. You took on a form resembling a boat,
and easily kept Satyavrata Ṛṣi and the seven principal
sages afloat.



kṣitir iha vipulatare tiṣṭhati tava pṛṣṭhe

dharaṇi-dharaṇa-kiṇa-cakra-gariṣṭhe

keśava! dhṛta-kūrma-śarīra! jaya jagadīśa! hare (2)

O Keśava! O You who assume the form of a tortoise! O
Jagadīśa! O You who steal Your devotees’ hearts! All
glories to You, because in this incarnation You hold the
Mandara Mountain and indeed the entire earth planet on
Your massive back, which is now adorned with many scar-
like depressions.



vasati daśana-śikhare dharaṇī tava lagnā

śaśini-kalaṅka-kaleva nimagnā

keśava! dhṛta-śūkara-rūpa! jaya jagadīśa! hare (3)

O Keśava! O You who assume the form of a boar! O
Jagadīśa! O You who remove Your devotees’ sins! All
glories to You, because the earth planet which had
become immersed in the ocean at the bottom of the
universe sits fixed to the tip of Your tusk like a spot
upon the moon.

                          213
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-śṛṅgaṁ

dalita-hiraṇyakaśipu-tanu-bhṛṅgam

keśava! dhṛta-narahari-rūpa! jaya jagadīśa! hare (4)

O Keśava! O You who assume the form of half-man, half-
lion! O Jagadīśa! O You who remove Your devotees’
suffering! All glories to You, because with one of the
wonderful, petal-like nails of Your beautiful lotus
hands You rip asunder the bumblebee-like body of
Hiraṇyakaśipu. The astonishing thing about this is that
ordinarily it is the bumblebee which rips the petals of
the lotus, but here the petal rips apart the bumblebee.



chalayasi vikramaṇe balim adbhuta-vāmana!

pada-nakha-nīra-janita-jana-pāvana!

keśava! dhṛta-vāmana-rūpa! jaya jagadīśa! hare (5)

O Keśava! O You who assume the wonderful form of a dwarf
brāhmaṇa! O Jagadīśa! O Hare, who steal away Your
devotees’ false egos! All glories to You, because at the
time of measuring the earth You deceived Bali Mahārāja
with Your massive steps and by the Ganges water which
emanates from the toe nails of Your lotus feet, You
purify all the residents of this world.



kṣatriya-rudhira-maye jagad-apagata-pāpaṁ

snapayasi payasi śamita-bhava-tāpam

keśava! dhṛta-bhṛgupati-rūpa! jaya jagadīśa! hare (6)

O Keśava! O You who assume the form of Paraśurāma! O
Jagadīśa! All glories to You, because You remove the
torments, sins, and sufferings of the residents of this
world by bathing the earth (at Kurukṣetra) in rivers of
blood from the bodies of the demoniac kṣatriyas whom You
slay.



vitarasi dikṣu raṇe dik-pati-kamanīyaṁ

daśa-mukha-mauli-baliṁ ramaṇīyam

keśava! dhṛta-rāma-śarīra! jaya jagadīśa! hare (7)

O Keśava! O You who assume the form of Rāmacandra! O
Jagadīśa! O You who remove the ṛṣis’ suffering! All
glories to You, because in the battle of Laṅka You
destroy the demon Rāvaṇa and distribute his heads as a
pleasing offering to the presiding deities of the ten
directions, who greatly desired this action due to being
much harassed by this monster.

                          214
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




vahasi vapuṣi viśade vasanaṁ jaladābhaṁ

hala-hati-bhīti-milita-yamunābham

keśava! dhṛta-haladhara-rūpa! jaya jagadīśa! hare (8)

O Keśava! O You who assume the form of Balarāma! O
Jagadīśa! O You who vanquish the arrogance of the
wicked! All glories to You, because on Your brilliant
white body You wear garments the colour of a fresh blue
raincloud. These garments are also the same beautiful
dark hue of the Yamunā who is greatly fearful due to the
striking of Your plough.



nindasi yajña vidher ahaha śruti-jātaṁ

sadaya-hṛdaya! darśita-paśu-ghātam

keśava! dhṛta-buddha-śarīra! jaya jagadīśa! hare (9)

O Keśava! O You who assume the form of Buddha! O
Jagadīśa! O You who dispel atheism! O Hare! All glories
to You because Your heart is so full of compassion.
Therefore You advocate non-violence as the supreme
religious principle. Aho! You decry the śrutis which
prescribe the performance of sacrifices that inflict
pain upon animals.



mleccha-nivaha-nidhane kalayasi karavālaṁ

dhūma-ketum iva kim api karālam

keśava! dhṛta-kalki-śarīra! jaya jagadīśa! hare (10)

O Keśava! O You who assume the form of Kalki! O
Jagadīśa! O You who remove the filth of the age of Kali!
All glories to You, because like a comet signifying the
eminent destruction of the wicked, You appear wielding a
huge, terrifying sword with which to annihilate the
barbarians who remain at the end of Kali-yuga.



śrī-jayadeva-kaver idam uditam udāraṁ

śṛṇu sukha-daṁ śubha-daṁ bhava-sāram

keśava! dhṛta-daśa-vidha-rūpa! jaya jagadīśa! hare (11)

O Keśava! O You who assume these ten forms! O Jagadīśa!
O You who remove Your devotees’ material desires! All
glories to You! My humble supplication at Your lotus
feet is that You please hear this Daśāvatāra-Stotra
composed by the poet Jayadeva, because it describes the
essence of Your incarnations and is most excellent,
bestowing happiness and auspiciousness.


                          215
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



vedān uddharate jaganti vahate bhū-golam udvibhrate

daityaṁ dārayate baliṁ chalayate kṣatra-kṣayaṁ kurvate

paulastyaṁ jayate halaṁ kalayate kāruṇyam ātanvate

mlecchān mūrcchayate daśākṛti-kṛte kṛṣṇāya tubhyaṁ namaḥ
(12)

O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You descend in ten incarnations! I offer
hundreds of praṇāmas unto You, because as Matsya You
rescue the Vedas, as Kūrma You support the earth planet,
as Varāha You lift the earth with Your tusks, as Nṛsiṁha
You tear open the chest of the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu, as
Vāmana You trick Bali, as Paraśurāma You slay the wicked
kṣatriyas, as Rāma You conquer Rāvaṇa, as Balarāma You
wield a plough, as Buddha You show compassion to all
living entities, and as Kalki You vanquish the
barbarians remaining at the end of Kali-yuga.




Śrī Ṣaḍ-Gosvāmyaṣṭakam

Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya



kṛṣṇotkīrtana-gāna-nartana-parau premāmṛtāmbho-nidhī

dhīrādhīra-jana-priyau priya-karau nirmatsarau pūjitau

śrī-caitanya-kṛpā-bharau bhuvi bhuvo bhārāvahantārakau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau (1)

I worship the Six Gosvāmīs, Śrī Rūpa, Sanātana,
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa, Raghunātha dāsa, Śrī Jīva, and Gopāla
Bhaṭṭa, who were always engaged in singing Kṛṣṇa’s name,
beauty, qualities, pastimes, and dancing in the mood of
the sweetness of His līlās. The Gosvāmīs are the very
embodiment of the ocean of the nectar of divine love
(premāmṛta-samudra-svarūpa). They are accepted and
respected by learned and ignorant persons alike, and
their activities endear them to all because they hold no
envy towards anyone. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has fully
blessed them with His mercy. Thus they are able to
spread the sweet nectar of bhakti, thereby diminishing
the burden of sinful life on the earth.

nānā-śāstra-vicāraṇaika-nipuṇau sad-dharma-saṁsthāpakau

lokānāṁ hita-kāriṇau tri-bhuvane mānyau śaraṇyākarau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-padāravinda-bhajanānandena mattālikau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau (2)

I offer prayers to the Six Gosvāmīs, who are expert in
extracting the essence of all the revealed scriptures

                          216
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

with the aim of establishing the jīva in his eternal
position of performing pure devotion (śuddha-bhakti-
rūpa-parama-dharma). Their activities bring
auspiciousness and supreme benefit to all. Thus, they
are worthy of worship throughout the three worlds. They
are especially affectionate to those who take shelter of
them, and they are so much absorbed in their service to
Śrī Rādhā-Govinda that they have become mad like bees
intoxicated by the honey of Their lotus feet.



śrī-gaurāṅga-guṇānuvarṇana-vidhau śraddhā-samṛddhy-
anvitau

pāpottāpa-nikṛntanau tanu-bhṛtāṁ govinda-gānāmṛtaiḥ

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaika-nipuṇau kaivalya-nistārakau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau (3)

I offer praṇāmas to the Six Gosvāmīs, who have so much
deep faith and love for Śrī Gaurāṅga. They are always
glorifying Mahāprabhu’s and Govinda’s qualities in songs
which create a cooling rainshower for the conditioned
jīvas burning up in miseries and sinful activities. Then
the purified jīvas can enter the ever-increasing ocean
of divine bliss (ānandāmbudhi). As the jīvas experience
this bliss, the whole world becomes auspicious. They
rescue the jīvas from impersonal liberation by pouring
upon them the nectar of bhakti-rasa.



tyaktvā tūrṇam aśeṣa-maṇḍala-pati-śreṇīṁ sadā tuccha vat

bhūtvā dīna-ganeśakau karuṇayā kaupīna-kanthāśritau

gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi-laharī-kallola-magnau muhur

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau (4)

I worship the Six Gosvāmīs, who abandoned as
insignificant their position in the aristocracy and took
on the garb of renunciation. Out of extreme mercy for
the conditioned souls, they humbly took only kaupins and
old, tattered cloth for their covering to demonstrate
how a sādhaka should live. But they were always
submerged in the ecstatic ocean of the gopīs’ love
(gopī-bhāva-rasāmṛtābdhi) for Kṛṣṇa, experiencing again
and again towering waves of ānanda rising up in their
hearts.



kūjat-kokila-haṁsa-sārasa-ganākīrṇe mayūrākule

nānā-ratna-nibaddha-mūla-viṭapa-śrī-yukta-vṛndāvane

rādhā-kṛṣṇam ahar-niśaṁ prabhajatau jīvārthadau yau mudā

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau (5)

I offer prayers to the Six Gosvāmīs, who were always

                          217
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

engaged in worshiping Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the
transcendental land of Vṛndāvana, which is full of so
many swans, cuckoos, parrots, peacocks and other birds
who are always calling out their sweet songs. The very
splendid trees are full of fruits and flowers and have
all valuable jewels under their roots. Day and night the
Gosvāmīs were doing their bhajana in that Vṛndāvana and
bestowing upon all jīvas the highest benediction of life
in the form of bhakti.



saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ kālāvasānī-kṛtau

nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-smṛter madhurimānandena sammohitau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau (6)

I worship the Six Gosvāmīs, who passed all their time in
chanting the holy names, singing songs, and offering
daṇḍavat-praṇāma, thereby humbly fulfilling their vow to
complete a fixed number daily. In this way they utilized
their valuable lives and conquered over eating and
sleeping. Always seeing themselves as completely
worthless, they became enchanted in divine rapture by
remembering Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s sweet qualities.



rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭe kalinda-tanayā-tīre ca vaṁśīvaṭe

premonmāda-vaśād aśeṣa-daśayā grastau pramattau sadā

gāyantau ca kadā harer guṇa-varaṁ bhāvābhibhūtau mudā

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau (7)

I offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma to the Six Gosvāmīs, who had
become mad in prema (premonmāda) in the mood of
separation. Sometimes they were going to the banks of
Rādhā-kuṇḍa or the Yamunā and sometimes to Vaṁśī-vaṭa.
Intoxicated in kṛṣṇa-prema, they were overwhelmed in
bhāva and jubilantly sang of Śrī Hari’s most sublime and
brilliant mādhurya-rasa.



he rādhe! vraja-devike! ca lalite! he nanda-sūno! kutaḥ

śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vanye kutaḥ

ghoṣantāv iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair mahā-vihvalau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau (8)

I am doing vandanā to the Six Gosvāmīs, who were always
calling out, “He Rādhe! O Queen of Vṛndāvana! Where are
You? He Lalite! O son of Nanda Mahārāja! Where are You?
Are You seated beneath the kalpa-vṛkṣa trees of Śrī
Govardhana Hill? Or are You roaming in the forests along
the soft banks of the Kālindī?” They were always
lamenting, overwhelmed and burning in feelings of great

                          218
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

separation as they wandered throughout all Vraja-
maṇḍala.




Śrī Prabhupāda-Pādma-Stavaḥ

Prayer to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s
Lotus Feet

Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Gosvāmī Mahārāja



sujanārbuda-rādhita-pāda-yugaṁ

yuga-dharma-dhurandhara-pātra-varam

varadābhaya-dāyaka-pūjya-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (1)

O Śrila Prabhupāda, your beautiful lotus feet are
cherished by millions and millions of the purest and
most qualified devotees, and you are the most competent
personality to preach the recognized process for this
era. Your sacred lotus feet are adorable, as they openly
grant fearlessness and bestow the highest benediction to
all living entities. I eternally offer my respects unto
that charming effulgence that shines forth from the
radiant lotus toe-tips of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda.



bhajanorjjita-sajjana-saṅgha-patiṁ

patitādhika-kāruṇikaika-gatim

gati-vañcita-vañcakācintya-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (2)

You shine forth as the natural leading monarch among the
highest class of devotees due to your immensely powerful
bhajana, and you are the exclusive, ultimate aim of the
truly fallen due to your far-reaching merciful embrace.
Your inconceivable lotus feet bestow full shelter for
the cheaters and the cheated.



ati-komala-kāñcana-dīrgha-tanuṁ

tanu-nindita-hema-mṛnāla-madam

madanārbuda-vandita-candra-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (3)

Your divine figure is so graceful and delicate, your
skin so soft, and your towering form so radiant and

                          219
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

golden. Your overwhelmingly beautiful appearance mocks
the pride of golden lotus stems as countless Cupids
offer their humble respects to your lotus toes which are
like glowing white petals of the radiant moon.



nija-sevaka-tāraka-rañji-vidhuṁ

vidhutāhita-huṅkṛta-siṁha-varam

varaṇāgata-bāliśa-śanda-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (4)

Like the charming moon which pleases its orbiting stars,
you are surrounded by your intimate disciples and are
fulfilling their hearts’ desires. Your lion-like roar
causes the envious to tremble and quickly flee while
your tender toes gracefully bestow the ultimate benefit
for the innocent.



vipulī-kṛta-vaibhava-gaura-bhuvaṁ

bhuvaneṣu vikīrtita-gaura-dayam

dayanīya-gaṇārpita-gaura-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (5)

You have widely spread the glories of Śrī Gaurāṅga’s
holy abode, Śrī Māyāpura-dhāma, and you have openly
declared the nature of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s mercy
throughout the universe. Your graceful personality has
planted the lotus of Gaurāṅga’s holy feet in the hearts
of your deserving servitors.



cira-gaura-janāśraya-viśva-guruṁ

guru-gaura-kiśoraka-dāsya-param

paramādṛta-bhakti-vinoda-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (6)

As the universal holy master, you are the eternal refuge
for Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s devotees. You are always
dedicated to serving your holy master Śrīla Gaura
Kiśora, and you are the abode of utmost honor for Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda.



raghu-rūpa-sanātana-kīrti-dharaṁ

dharaṇī-tala-kīrtita-jīva-kavim

kavirāja-narottama-sakhya-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (7)

                          220
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


The intense magnitude of your devotion allows you a
glorious position within that intimate group of
Raghunātha dāsa, Sanātana, and Rūpa Gosvāmīs. Your happy
and elevated philosophical conceptions have crowned and
seated you along with that esteemed personalilty, Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī. And you share friendly relations with
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja and Narottama dāsa, being as dear to
them as their very own lives.



kṛpayā hari-kīrtana-mūrti-dharaṁ

dharaṇī-bhara-hāraka-gaura-janam

janakādhika-vatsala-snigdha-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (8)

You serve the living entities by mercifully revealing
your divine personality as the embodiment of hari-
kīrtana, and by so doing, eliminate the offenses which
burden the earth. Your loving disposition is more
affectionate than even a father to the followers of
Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu.



śaraṇāgata-kiṅkara-kalpa-taruṁ

taru-dhik-kṛta-dhīra-vadānya-varam

varadendra-gaṇārcita-divya-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (9)

Just like a transcendental desire tree, you fulfill all
the desires of the Lord’s unalloyed servants. Your firm
and patient nature insults the tolerant disposition of a
tree, what to speak of your benevolence. The purity of
your divine lotus feet attracts the worship of the great
demigods like Durga-devī and Indra.



parahaṁsa-varaṁ paramārtha-patiṁ

patitoddharaṇe kṛta-veśa-yatiṁ

yati-rāja-gaṇaiḥ parisevya-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (10)

Being the storehouse-keeper of life’s highest wealth,
pure kṛṣṇa-prema, you surpass all the other great mahā-
bhāgavata devotees! Simply to rescue the fallen souls,
you accepted the dress of a renunciate. Hence, your
divine lotus feet are adorable in every respect for the
greatest stalwart sannyāsīs.



vṛṣabhānu-sutā-dayitānucaraṁ

                          221
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


caraṇāśrita-reṇu-dharas tam aham

mahad-adbhuta-pāvana-śakti-padaṁ

praṇamāmi sadā prabhupāda-padam (11)

Since you are an exclusive servitor of Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, my bold aspiration is to take full
shelter as a minute atomic particle of that shining dust
that clings to your beautiful lotus feet. Your wonderful
śakti can deliver the whole world. I eternally offer my
repects unto that charming effulgence that shines forth
from the radiant lotus toe-tips of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda!



[Note: Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī was so pleased
with this offering that he ordered it to be sung in all
his maṭhas daily. This poem exhibits a remarkable rhyme
scheme, the second to last syllable always begins the
next line. It also reveals a deep siddhāntic
understanding of the mission of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta.]




Śrī Keśavācāryāṣṭakam

Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja



namaḥ oṁ viṣṇupādāya ācārya-siṁha-rūpiṇe

śrī-śrīmad-bhakti-prajñāna-keśava iti nāmine (1)

I offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma to the lion-like ācārya oṁ
viṣṇu-pāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja...



śrī-sarasvaty abhīpsitaṁ sarvathā suṣṭhu-pāline

śrī-sarasvaty abhinnāya patitoddhāra-kāriṇe (2)

...who in every way proficiently fulfills the earnest
desire of Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda and in his
deliverance of the fallen is actually non-different from
Śrīla Prabhupāda...



vajrād api kaṭhorāya cāpasiddhānta-nāśine

satya-rayārthe nirbhīkāya kusaṅga-parihāriṇe (3)

...who is as hard and severe as a thunderbolt in
eradicating unauthorized philosophical conclusions, who
is fearless in establishing the truth, and who removes
detrimental association...


                          222
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017



atimartya-caritrāya svā-śritānāṣ ca pāline

jīva-duḥkhe sadārttāya śrī-nāma-prema-dāyine (4)

...who is a thoroughly transcendental personality, who
nurtures with great affection those who have taken
shelter of him, who is always sad to see the sufferings
of souls who are inimical to Kṛṣṇa, who bestows love for
the holy name...



viṣṇu-pāda-prakāśāya kṛṣṇa-kāmaika-cāriṇe

gaura-cintā-nimagnāya śrī-guruṁ hṛdi dhāriṇe (5)

...who is a direct manifestation of Śrī Viṣṇu’s lotus
feet, whose only engagement is fulfilling the desires of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is immersed in meditation upon Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who always keeps his own Śrī Guru
in his heart...



viṣvaṁ viṣṇumayam iti snigdha-darśana-śāline

namas te gurudevāya kṛṣṇa-vaibhava-rūpiṇe (6)

... and who, by his loving vision, sees the presence of
Viṣṇu everywhere. I offer praṇāma to Śrī Gurudeva, who
is the embodiment of Kṛṣṇa’s eminence...



śrī-śrī-gauḍīya-vedānta-samiteḥ sthāpakāya ca

śrī-śrī-māyāpura-dhāmnaḥ sevā-samṛddhi-kāriṇe (7)

...who established the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, and
who greatly enhanced the service to Śrī Māyāpura-dhāma.



navadvīpa-parikramā yenaiva rakṣitā sadā

dīnaṁ prati dayālave tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ (8)

I offer praṇāma to Śrīla Gurudeva, who perennially
protects the parikramā of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma and is
forever merciful to fallen persons.



dehi me tava śaktis tu dīneneyaṁ suyācitā

tava pāda-sarojebhyo matir astu pradhāvitā (9)

He Gurudeva! Please bestow your mercy upon this forlorn
person, who always desires it in all respects, so that I
may remain forever immersed in meditation on your lotus
feet.


                          223
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017




Śrī Jagannāthāṣṭakam

composed by Śrī Śaṅkarācārya and

chanted by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu



kadācit kālindī-taṭa-vipina-saṅgīta-taralo

mudābhīrī-nārī-vadana-kamalāsvāda-madhupaḥ

ramā-śambhu-brahmāmara-pati-gaṇeśārcita-pado

jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me (1)

Śrī Jagannāthadeva sometimes fervently plays His flute
on the banks of the Yamunā River in Śrī Vṛndāvana; He is
like a bumblebee that blissfully tastes the lotus faces
of the Vraja gopīs; and His feet are worshiped by great
personalities such as Lakṣmī, Śiva, Brahmā, Indra, and
Gaṇeśa. May that Śrī Jagannāthadeva be the object of my
vision.



bhuje savye veṇuṁ śirasi śikhi-picchaṁ kaṭitaṭe

dukūlaṁ netrānte sahacara-kaṭākṣaṁ ca vidadhat

sadā śrīmad-vṛndāvana-vasati-līlā-paricayo

jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me (2)

Śrī Jagannāthadeva holds a flute in His left hand; He
wears a peacock feather on His head and a fine yellow
silken cloth around His hips; from the corners of His
eyes He bestows loving sidelong glances upon His
companions; and He is forever known as the one who
performs wondrous pastimes in the divine abode of Śrī
Vṛndāvana. May that Śrī Jagannāthadeva be the object of
my vision.



mahāmbhodhes tīre kanaka-rucire nīla-śikhare

vasan prāsādāntaḥ sahaja-balabhadreṇa balinā

subhadrā-madhya-sthaḥ sakala-sura-sevāvasara-do

jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me (3)

Śrī Jagannāthadeva on the shore of the great ocean
resides in a palace situated on the gold-like crest of
Nīlācala Hill accompanied by His powerful brother
Baladevajī and Their sister Subhadrā, and He bestows
upon all the demigods the opportunity to serve Him. May
that Śrī Jagannāthadeva be the object of my vision.


                          224
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017



kṛpā-pārāvāraḥ sajala-jalada-śreṇi-ruciro

ramā-vāṇī-rāmaḥ sphurad-amala-paṅkeruha-mukhaḥ

surendrair ārādhyaḥ śruti-gaṇa-śikhā-gīta-carito

jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me (4)

Śrī Jagannāthadeva is an ocean of mercy; His bodily
complexion is as beautiful as a bank of blackish
rainclouds; He enjoys with Lakṣmī-devī and Sarasvatī;
His face is like a fully blossomed spotless lotus; He is
worshiped by the foremost demigods, and His
transcendental glories have been sung in the topmost
scriptures. May that Śrī Jagannāthadeva be the object of
my vision.



rathārūḍho gacchan pathi milita-bhūdeva-paṭalaiḥ

stuti-prādurbhāvaṁ prati-padam upākarṇya sadayaḥ

dayā-sindhur bandhuḥ sakala-jagatāṁ sindhu-sutayā

jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me (5)

When Jagannātha’s Ratha-yatra is moving along the road,
at every step assemblies of brāhmaṇas sing His praises.
Upon hearing them, Jagannātha, being an ocean of mercy
and the true friend of all the worlds, becomes favorably
disposed towards them. May that Śrī Jagannāthadeva be
the object of my vision.



param-brahmāpīḍaḥ kuvalaya-dalotphulla-nayano

nivāsī nīlādrau nihita-caraṇo ’nanta-śirasi

rasānandī rādhā-sarasa-vapur āliṅgana-sukho

jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me (6)

Śrī Jagannāthadeva is the crown-jewel of all
manifestations of the absolute truth; His eyes are like
the petals of a fully blossomed blue lotus; He resides
at Nīlācala; His feet are placed on the head of Śeṣa, He
is blissfully immersed in bhakti-rasa; and He derives
happiness from embracing the rasa-laden body of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. May that Śrī Jagannāthadeva be the object of my
vision.



na vai yāce rājyaṁ na ca kanaka-māṇikya-vibhavaṁ

na yāce ’haṁ ramyāṁ sakala-jana-kāmyāṁ vara-vadhūm

sadā kāle kāle pramatha-patinā gīta-carito

jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me (7)

                          225
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


I do not pray to Jagannātha for a kingdom, nor for gold,
jewels, wealth, or even for a beautiful wife as desired
by all men. My only prayer is that Śrī Jagannāthadeva,
whose splendid glories are always sung by Śiva, be the
constant object of my vision.



hara tvaṁ saṁsāraṁ drutataram asāraṁ sura-pate!

hara tvaṁ pāpānāṁ vitatim aparāṁ yādava-pate!

aho dīne ’nāthe nihita-caraṇo niścitam idaṁ

jagannāthaḥ svāmī nayana-patha-gāmī bhavatu me (8)

O master of the demigods! Quickly deliver me from this
worthless and fleeting worldly existence. O Lord of the
Yadus! Purge me of my limitless host of sins. Aho! You
have vowed to place Your feet upon the fallen and
shelterless—O Jagannātha Svāmī, please be the object of
my vision.



jagannāthāṣṭakaṁ puṇyaṁ yaḥ paṭhet prayataḥ śuci

sarva-pāpa-viśuddhātmā viṣṇu-lokaṁ sa gacchati (9)

One who carefully recites this sacred Jagannāthāṣṭakam,
upon becoming sinless and pure-hearted, will attain
entrance into Viṣṇuloka.




Śrī Nityānandāṣṭakam

Śrīla Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura



śarac-candra-bhrāntiṁ sphurad-amala-kāntiṁ gaja-gatiṁ

hari-premonmattaṁ dhṛta-parama-sattvaṁ smita-mukham

sadā ghūrṇan netraṁ kara-kalita-vetraṁ kali-bhidaṁ

bhaje nityānandaṁ bhajana-taru-kandaṁ niravadhi (1)

I perpetually worship Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, the root of
the kṛṣṇa-bhakti tree, whose bright face mocks the full
autumn moon, whose pure complexion glistens, whose gait
is like that of an intoxicated elephant, who is always
mad in kṛṣṇa-prema, who is the personification of pure
spiritual energy, whose face wears a gentle smile, whose
eyes are always rolling due to His absorption in kṛṣṇa-
prema, whose lotus hand is beautified with a staff, and
who, by the performance of nāma-saṅkīrtana, pierces the
influence of Kali-yuga.



                          226
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


rasānām-rasānām āgāraṁ svajana-gaṇa-sarvasvam atulaṁ

tadīyaika-prāṇa-pratima-vasudhā-jāhnavā-patim

sadā premonmādaṁ parama-viditaṁ manda-manasāṁ

bhaje nityānandaṁ bhajana-taru-kandaṁ niravadhi (2)

I perpetually worship Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, the root of
the kṛṣṇa-bhakti tree, who is the mainstay of all the
rasas, who is everything to His devotees, who is beyond
compare, who is the master of both Vasudhā and Jāhnavā-
devī who consider Him more dear than their own lives,
who is always maddened in kṛṣṇa-prema, and who is
unknown only to those of meager intelligence.



śacī-sūnu-preṣṭhaṁ nikhila-jagad iṣṭaṁ sukhamayaṁ

kalau majjaj-jīvoddharaṇa-karaṇoddāma-karuṇam

harer-ākhyānād-vā bhava-jaladhi-garvonnati haraṁ

bhaje nityānandaṁ bhajana-taru-kandaṁ niravadhi (3)

I perpetually worship Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, the root of
the kṛṣṇa-bhakti tree, who is very dear to Śrī Śacī-
nandana, who is worshiped by the entire universe, who is
the embodiment of happiness, whose infinite mercy is the
means for delivering the souls who are drowning in the
age of Kali, and who by performing śrī-harināma-
saṅkīrtana eradicates the swelling false pride of the
ocean of repeated birth and death.



aye bhrātar nṛṇāṁ kali-kaluṣiṇāṁ kinnu bhavitā

tathā prāyaścitaṁ racaya yad anāyāsata ime

vrajanti tvām-itthaṁ saha bhagavatā mantrayati yo

bhaje nityānandaṁ bhajana-taru-kandaṁ niravadhi (4)

I perpetually worship Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, the root of
the kṛṣṇa-bhakti tree, who said to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya,
“He brother Gaurāṅga! What will be the destination of
the sinful souls of Kali-yuga and how will they be
redeemed? Please devise a method by which they will
easily attain You.”



yatheṣṭaṁ re bhrātaḥ! kuru hari-hari-dhvānam aniśaṁ

tato vaḥ saṁsārāmbudhi-taraṇa-dāyo mayi laget

idaṁ bāhu-sphoṭair aṭati raṭayan yaḥ pratigṛhaṁ

bhaje nityānandaṁ bhajana-taru-kandaṁ niravadhi (5)

I perpetually worship Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, the root of

                          227
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

the kṛṣṇa-bhakti tree, who wandering around Bengal,
approached the door of every home, and with upraised
arms exclaimed, “O Brothers! Without inhibition all of
you together, continuously chant śrī-harināma. If you do
so, I will take the responsibility to deliver you from
the ocean of material existence.”



balāt saṁsārāmbhonidhi-haraṇa-kumbhodbhavam aho

satāṁ śreyaḥ-sindhūnnati-kumuda-bandhuṁ samuditaṁ

khala-śreṇī-sphūrjat-timira-hara-sūrya-prabham ahaṁ

bhaje nityānandaṁ bhajana-taru-kandaṁ niravadhi (6)

I eternally worship Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, the root of
the kṛṣṇa-bhakti tree, who is the Agastya Muni who
forcibly swallows the ocean of repeated birth and death,
who is a rising full moon which causes the ocean of the
saintly persons’ welfare (their bhāvas) to swell, and
who is the sun whose brilliant rays dissipate the
darkness of ignorance cast by the various classes of
miscreants.



naṭantaṁ gāyantaṁ harim anuvadantaṁ pathi pathi

vrajantaṁ paśyantaṁ svam api na dayantaṁ jana-gaṇam

prakurvantaṁ santaṁ sakaruṇa-dṛgantaṁ prakalanād

bhaje nityānandaṁ bhajana-taru-kandaṁ niravadhi (7)

I eternally worship Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, the root of
the kṛṣṇa-bhakti tree, who wandered on every path in
Bengal dancing, singing, and calling out “Hari bol! Hari
bol!” and who lovingly bestowed merciful sidelong
glances upon those who were not compassionate to even
their own selves.



subibhrāṇaṁ bhrātuḥ kara-sarasi-jaṁ komalataraṁ

mitho vaktrālokocchalita-paramānanda-hṛdayam

bhramantaṁ mādhuryair ahaha! madayantaṁ pura-janān

bhaje nityānandaṁ bhajana-taru-kandaṁ niravadhi (8)

I eternally worship Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, the root of
the kṛṣṇa-bhakti tree, who held the supremely soft
lotus-hand of His brother Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, whose
heart became filled with the highest bliss when the two
brothers gazed into each other’s faces, and who wandered
here and there delighting the townspeople with His
sweetness.



rasānām ādhāraṁ rasika-vara-sad-vaiṣṇava-dhanaṁ

                          228
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


rasāgāraṁ sāraṁ patita-tati-tāraṁ smaraṇataḥ

paraṁ nityānandāṣṭakam idam apūrvaṁ paṭhati yas

tad-aṅghri-dvandvābjaṁ sphuratu nitarāṁ tasya hṛdaye (9)

May Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu place His lotus feet in the
heart of one who lovingly recites this unprecedented and
supremely potent Nityānandāṣṭakam, which is the
reservoir of rasa, the greatest treasure of the most
exalted of rasika Vaiṣṇavas, and the storehouse of the
essence of bhakti-rasa. It bestows liberation to a
fallen soul who simply remembers Nityānanda’s sublime
qualities. (This aṣṭaka is recited in the poetic meter
known as ‘Śikhariṇī’.)




Śrī Caitanyāṣṭakam

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



sadopāsyaḥ śrīmān dhṛta-manuja-kāyaiḥ praṇayitāṁ

vahadbhir gīrvāṇair giriśa-parameṣṭhi-prabhṛtibhiḥ

sva-bhaktebhyaḥ śuddhāṁ nija-bhajana-mudrām upadiśan

sa caitanyaḥ kiṁ me punar api dṛśor yāsyati padam (1)

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is perpetually worshipable for
demigods such as Śiva and Brahmā who have assumed human
form (as Advaita Ācārya and Haridāsa Ṭhākura) and who
nurture great love for Him; He is supremely radiant; and
He instructs His devotees on the practice of pure
bhajana. When will that Śrī Caitanya-deva again become
visible to me?



sureśānāṁ durgaṁ gatir atiśayenopaniṣadāṁ

munīnāṁ sarva svaṁ praṇata-paṭalīnāṁ madhurimā

viniryāsaḥ premṇo nikhila-paśu-pālāmbuja-dṛśāṁ

sa caitanyaḥ kiṁ me punar api dṛśor yāsyati padam (2)

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is a fortress which constitutes
the basis of fearlessness for the demigods; He is the
ultimate truth and goal as delineated by the Upaniṣads,
the wealth of the sages in both worlds, and the
embodiment of sweetness for His devotees who approach
Him in the mood of servitude; He is the essence of that
type of kṛṣṇa-prema which is possessed by the gopīs of
Vraja. When will that Śrī Caitanya-deva again become
visible to me?



                          229
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


svarūpaṁ bibhrāṇo jagad-atulam advaita-dayitaḥ

prapanna-śrīvāso janita-paramānanda-garimā

harir dīnoddhārī gaja-pati-kṛpotseka-taralaḥ

sa caitanyaḥ kiṁ me punar api dṛśor yāsyati padam (3)

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu with the nectar of His mercy
forever nourishes His eternal associates such as Svarūpa
Dāmodara and Anupama (father of Jīva Gosvāmī); He is
very dear to Advaita Ācārya and the object of Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita’s surrender; He honoured Paramānanda Purī as His
Guru; He is known as ‘Hari’ because He steals away the
ignorance of material existence; He is the saviour of
the fallen who are oppressed by the three-fold miseries;
and He is always eager to shower Gajapati Pratāparudra,
the king of Orissa, with streams of His mercy. When will
that Śrī Caitanya-deva again become visible to me?



rasoddāmā kāmārbuda-madhura-dhāmojjvala-tanur

yatīnām uttaṁsas taraṇi-kara-vidyoti-vasanaḥ

hiraṇyānāṁ lakṣmī-bharam abhibhavann āṅgika-rucā

sa caitanyaḥ kiṁ me punar api dṛśor yāsyati padam (4)

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is forever intoxicated in the
happiness of relishing madhura-rasa; His captivating
form is more splendrous than the sweet, enchanting
radiance of millions of Kāmadevas; He is the crest-jewel
of sannyāsīs; His cloth is the color of the rays of the
rising sun, and His bodily complexion defeats the
splendor of molten gold. When will that Śrī Caitanya-
deva again become visible to me?



hare kṛṣṇety uccaiḥ sphurita-rasano nāma-gaṇanā-

kṛta-granthi-śreṇī-subhaga-kaṭi-sūtrojjvala-karaḥ

viśālākṣo dīrghārgala-yugala-khelāñcita-bhujaḥ

sa caitanyaḥ kiṁ me punar api dṛśor yāsyati padam (5)

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s tongue is always dancing by
loudly calling out “Hare Kṛṣṇa!” (or the mahā-mantra
ecstatically dances of its own volition on the
theatrical stage of His tongue); He counts the names
which He is calling out on the exquisite strip of
kaupīna cloth from around His waist which has been tied
with knots for chanting; His eyes are so large that they
seem to reach His ears; and His long arms extend down to
His knees. When will that Śrī Caitanya-deva again become
visible to me?



payorāśes tīre sphurad-upavanālī-kalanayā

                          230
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


muhur vṛndāraṇya-smaraṇa-janita-prema-vivaśaḥ

kvacit kṛṣṇāvṛtti-pracala-rasano bhakti-rasikaḥ

sa caitanyaḥ kiṁ me punar api dṛśor yāsyati padam (6)

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, upon seeing the wondrous
gardens which line the shores of the ocean at Jagannātha
Purī, time and again becomes overwhelmed by the prema
which arises from remembering Vṛndāvana; He is the
supreme rasika of prema-bhakti, and His tongue thus
sings the names of Kṛṣṇa at every moment. When will that
Śrī Caitanya-deva again become visible to me?



rathārūḍhasyārād adhipadavi nīlācala-pater

adabhra-premormi-sphurita-naṭanollāsa-vivaśaḥ

sa-harṣaṁ gāyadbhiḥ parivṛta-tanur vaiṣṇava-janaiḥ

sa caitanyaḥ kiṁ me punar api dṛśor yāsyati padam (7)

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, surrounded on all sides by
jubilant devotees performing nāma-saṅkīrtana and
overwhelmed in great prema, dances before the cart of
Jagannātha-deva. When will that Śrī Caitanya-deva again
become visible to me?



bhuvaṁ siñcann aśru-srutibhir abhitaḥ sāndra-pulakaiḥ

parītāṅgo nīpa-stabaka-nava-kiñjalka-jayibhiḥ

ghana-sveda-stoma-stimita-tanur utkīrtana-sukhī

sa caitanyaḥ kiṁ me punar api dṛśor yāsyati padam (8)

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu drenches the ground with the
streams of tears falling from His eyes; His limbs are
decorated with horripilation which defeats the beauty of
clusters of kadamba blossoms; His entire body is moist
with perspiration; and He is blissful as He brazenly
performs kīrtana while standing with upraised arms. When
will that Śrī Caitanya-deva again become visible to me?



adhīte gaurāṅga-smaraṇa-padavī-maṅgalataraṁ

kṛtī yo viśrambha-sphurad-amala-dhīr aṣṭakam idam

parānande sadyas tad-amala-padāmbhoja-yugale

parisphārā tasya sphuratu nitarāṁ prema-laharī (9)

That fortunate person of pure intelligence who remembers
Śrī Caitanya-deva by faithfully reciting this very
auspicious aṣṭaka will instantly experience powerful
waves of prema for Mahāprabhu’s supremely blissful lotus
feet arising within his heart—this is the blessing of

                          231
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

the author.



Śrī Śacī-Tanayāṣṭakam

Śrī Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya



ujjvala-varaṇa-gaura-vara-dehaṁ

vilasita-niravadhi-bhāva-videham

tri-bhuvana-pāvana-kṛpāyāḥ leśaṁ

taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī śacī-tanayam (1)

I offer pranāma to Śacī-tanaya (son of Śacī) Śrī
Gaurahari whose sublime form is more brilliant than
molten gold, who being overwhelmed in the bhāva of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā incessantly performs varieties of
ecstatic pastimes, and who purifies the three worlds
with a mere particle of His mercy.



gadagada-antara-bhāva-vikāraṁ

durjana-tarjana-nāda-viśālam

bhava-bhaya-bhañjana-kāraṇa-karuṇaṁ

taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī śacī-tanayam (2)

I offer praṇāma to Śacīnandana Śrī Gaurahari, whose
voice always falters as He experiences waves of
sāttvika-bhāva in His heart, and whose thunderous roar
strikes terror in the atheists opposing bhakti. His
mercy breaks all fear of material existence.



aruṇāmbaradhara-cāru-kapolaṁ

indu-vinindita-nakha-caya-ruciram

jalpita-nija-guṇa-nāma-vinodaṁ

taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī-śacī-tanayam (3)

I offer praṇāma to Śacī-tanaya Śrī Gaurahari who is
dressed in cloth the color of the rising sun, whose
lovely cheeks are exceedingly enchanting, whose
fingernails radiate a brilliance which defeats the glory
of the full moon, and who receives immense bliss from
performing the kīrtana of His own names and virtues.



vigalita-nayana-kamala-jaladhāraṁ

bhūṣaṇa-nava-rasa-bhāva-vikāram


                          232
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

gati ati-manthara-nṛtya-vilāsaṁ

taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī śacī-tanayam (4)

I offer praṇāma to Śacī-tanaya Śrī Gaurahari from whose
lotus eyes streams of tears are perpetually flowing,
whose body is decorated with ever-fresh aṣṭa-sāttvika-
bhāvas, and whose movements are gently flowing as He
dances.



cañcala-cāru-caraṇa-gati-ruciram

mañjīra-rañjita-pada-yuga-madhuram

candra-vinindita-śītala-vadanaṁ

taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī śacī-tanayam (5)

I offer praṇāma to Śacī-tanaya Śrī Gaurahari, the
restless movements of whose exquisite lotus feet, which
are adorned with anklebells, are immensely enchanting
and whose face is more cooling than the moon.



dhṛta-kaṭi-ḍora-kamaṇḍalu-daṇḍaṁ

divya kalevara-muṇḍita-muṇḍam

durjana-kalmaṣa-khaṇḍana-daṇḍaṁ

taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī śacī-tanayam (6)

I offer praṇāma to Śacī-tanaya Śrī Gaurahari who wears a
tie for His kaupīnas (ḍora) around His waist, whose
shaven head is exceedingly beautiful, and who holds a
kamaṇḍalu in one hand and a daṇḍa which vanquishes the
sins of the wicked in the other.



bhūṣaṇa-bhūraja-alakā-valitaṁ

kampita-bimbādhara-vara-ruciram

malayaja-viracita-ujjvala-tilakaṁ

taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī śacī-tanayam (7)

I offer praṇāma to Śacī-tanaya Śrī Gaurahari whose hair
looks very beautiful ornamented with the dust of the
earth which rises up as He dances, whose immensely
captivating bimba-fruit-like red lips are quivering due
to His singing harināma-kīrtana, and whose forehead is
adorned with glistening tilaka composed of malayaja-
candana.



nindita-aruṇa-kamala-dala-nayanaṁ

ājānu-lambita-śrī-bhuja-yugalam

                          233
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


kalevara-kaiśora-nartaka-veśaṁ

taṁ praṇamāmi ca śrī śacī-tanayam (8)

I offer praṇāma to Śacī-tanaya Śrī Gaurahari whose eyes
the color of the rising sun (aruṇa) defeat the splendour
of a cluster of lotus flowers, whose arms reach to His
knees, and whose form is nicely attired as a youthful
dancer.




Śrī Śacī-Sūnvāṣṭakam

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī



harir dṛṣṭvā goṣṭhe mukura-gatam ātmānam atulaṁ

sva-mādhuryaṁ rādhā-priyatara-sakhīvāptum abhitaḥ

aho gauḍe jātaḥ prabhur apara-gauraika-tanu-bhāk

śacī-sūnuḥ kiṁ me nayana-śaraṇīṁ yāsyati punaḥ (1)

Śacī-sunu is that Śrī Hari who, being enchanted upon
beholding His own incomparable beauty in a mirror, took
birth in Gauḍa-deśa to taste all of His own sweetness as
only His dear sakhī Śrīmatī Rādhikā could, and aho! He
even adopted Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s own golden complexion
when He did so. When will that son of Śacī again grant
me His darśana?

purī-devasyāntaḥ praṇaya-madhunā snāna-madhuro

muhur govindodyad-viśada-paricaryārcita-padaḥ

svarūpasya prāṇārbuda-kamala-nīrājita-mukhaḥ

śacī-sūnuḥ kiṁ me nayana-śaraṇīṁ yāsyati punaḥ (2)

Śacī-sunu was bathed by the honey of love which exists
within Śrī Iśvara Purī’s heart, His lotus feet were
expertly served by Govinda dāsa, and His lovely face was
constantly worshiped by the unlimited lotus flowers of
Svarūpa Dāmodara’s very life. When will the son of Śacī
again be visible to me?



dadhānaḥ kaupīnaṁ tad-upari bahir-vastram aruṇaṁ

prakāṇḍo hemādri dyutibhir abhitaḥ sevita-tanuḥ

mudā gāyann uccair nija-madhura-nāmāvalim asau

śacī-sūnuḥ kiṁ me nayana-śaraṇīṁ yāsyati punaḥ (3)

Although He is Bhagavān Himself, He wore kaupīnas and
over them a saffron outer cloth just to set an example

                          234
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

for His devotees. Upon seeing the brilliant golden
complexion of His large body, Mount Sumerū abandoned its
pride and worshiped that complexion with all of its own
majestic beauty. In the mood of a devotee and attired as
a sannyāsī, He wandered about loudly singing His own
names with great delight. When will the son of Śacī
again grant me His darśana?



anāvedyāṁ pūrvair api muni-gaṇair bhakti-nipuṇaiḥ

śruter gūḍhāṁ premojjvala-rasa-phalāṁ bhakti-latikām

kṛpālus tāṁ gauḍe prabhur ati-kṛpābhiḥ prakaṭayan

śacī-sūnuḥ kiṁ me nayana-śaraṇīṁ yāsyati punaḥ (4)

Out of immeasurable mercy, in Bengal Prabhu revealed and
expanded the creeper of bhakti which bears the fruit of
ujjvala-prema-rasa. The munis of previous ages, although
highly expert in the science of bhakti, could not attain
a true understanding of this creeper because the śrutis
had kept it hidden like a priceless jewel. When will the
son of Śacī again grant me His darśana?



nijatve gauḍīyān jagati parigṛhya prabhur imān

hare-kṛṣṇety evaṁ gaṇana-vidhinā kīrtayata bhoḥ

iti prāyāṁ śikṣāṁ janaka iva tebhyaḥ paridiśan

śacī-sūnuḥ kiṁ me nayana-śaraṇīṁ yāsyati punaḥ (5)

Śacī-sunu, taking the residents of Bengal as His own,
inspired them to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa a prescribed number of
times daily and like a father gave them many cherished
instructions. When will the son of Śacī again become
visible to me?



puraḥ paśyan nīlācala-patim uru-prema-nivahaiḥ

kṣaran netrāmbhobhiḥ snapita-nija-dīrghojjvala-tanuḥ

sadā tiṣṭhan deśe praṇayi-garuḍa-stambha-carame

śacī-sūnuḥ kiṁ me nayana-śaraṇīṁ yāsyati punaḥ (6)

Śacī-sunu bathed His very beautiful, tall body with the
streams of tears caused by His immense prema as He stood
behind His beloved Garuḍa-stambha receiving the darśana
of Jagannātha-deva. When will the son of Śacī again
become visible to me?



mudā dantair daṣṭvā dyuti-vijita-bandhūkam adharaṁ

karaṁ kṛtvā vāmaṁ kaṭi-nihitam anyaṁ parilasan


                          235
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

samutthāpya premṇāgaṇita-pulako nṛtya-kautukī

śacī-sūnuḥ kiṁ me nayana-śaraṇīṁ yāsyati punaḥ (7)

Biting His lips which defeat the redness of the bandhuka
flower, placing His left hand on His hip, waving His
right hand above His head, and with His innumerable
bodily hairs all standing on end due to His absorption
in the emotions of Śrīmatī Rādhikā as She felt
separation from Kṛṣṇa, He would dance with the greatest
delight. When will the son of Śacī again grant me His
darśana?



sarit-tīrārāme viraha-vidhuro gokula-vidhor

nadīm anyāṁ kurvan nayana-jala-dhārā-vitatibhiḥ

muhur murcchāṁ gacchan mṛtakam iva viśvaṁ viracayan

śacī-sūnuḥ kiṁ me nayana-śaraṇīṁ yāsyati punaḥ (8)

In a garden on the banks of a river, Śacī-sunu shed so
many tears while feeling separation from the moon of
Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, that He created a new river, and by
repeatedly falling unconscious He caused the whole world
to also fall flat as if lifeless. When will the son of
Śacī again grant me His darśana?



śacī-sūnor asyāṣṭakam idam abhīṣṭaṁ viracayat

sadā dainyodrekād ati-viśada-buddhiḥ paṭhati yaḥ

prakāmaṁ caitanyaḥ prabhur ati-kṛpāveśa-vivaśaḥ

pṛthu premāmbhodhau prathita-rasade majjayati tam (9)

Whoever with incessant feelings of humility and pure
heart recites this aṣṭaka which describes Śrī Śacī-sūnu,
who fulfills His devotees’ desires, will receive His
mercy and be plunged into the fathomless ocean of
nectarean kṛṣṇa-prema.




Śrī Gaura-Gīti

Śrī Rādhā-Mohana dāsa



sakhe, kalaya gauram udāram

nindita-hāṭaka-kānti-kalevara-garvita-māraka-māram (1)

He sakhe! Sing about the sweet name, beauty, attributes,
and pastimes of Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari, who performs
supremely munificent pastimes, whose bodily complexion
vanquishes the luster of molten gold, whose beauty

                          236
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

defeats that of millions of Cupids...



madhukara-rañjita-mālati-maṇḍita-jita-ghana-kuñcita-
keśam

tilaka-vinindita-śaśadhara-rūpaka-bhuvana-manohara-veśam
(2)

...who is charmingly adorned with a garland of beautiful
and fragrant mālatī flowers which is itself embellished
by the sweet humming of black bees, the splendor of
whose locks of curling black hair defeats the brilliance
of dark clouds, whose tilaka is more brilliant than the
moon, whose beautiful attire enchants the minds of
everyone in the entire universe...



madhu-madhura-smita-lobhita-tanu-bhṛtam anupama-bhāva-
vilāsam

nidhuvana nāgarī mohita-mānasa-vikathita-gadgada-bhāṣam
(3)

...whose sweet, gentle smile and unexcelled sentiments
of pure love charm all embodied beings, whose heart is
thoroughly immersed in Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s unnatojjvala-
prema, and who lovingly extols Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a choked
voice.



paramākiñcana-kiñcana-nara-gaṇa-karuṇā-vitaraṇa-śīlam

kṣobhita-durmati-rādhā-mohana-nāmaka-nirupama-līlam (4)

Hankering to relish the unparalleled pastimes of the
greatly munificent Śrī Gaurasundara, who distributes
mercy in the form of nāma-prema to the supremely
fortunate niskiñcana souls (those whose only possession
is love of Kṛṣṇa), the fallen and foolish Rādhā-Mohana
sings in a mood of great distress.




Vande Viśvambhara

Śrī Rādhā-Mohana dāsa



vande viśvambhara-pada-kamalam

khaṇḍita-kaliyuga-jana-malam amalam (1)

I offer prayers to the lotus feet of Viśvambhara, who
cuts away the defective consciousness of those who are
influenced by Kali-yuga.



                          237
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


saurabha-karṣita nija-jana-madhupam

karuṇā khaṇḍita-viraha-vitāpam (2)

With the fragrance of His supremely sweet philosophy,
name, qualities, etc., Mahāprabhu attracts His honeybee-
like followers. By His causeless mercy, He removes the
anguish of separation of His dear associates (like
Advaita Ācārya).



nāśita-hṛd-gata-māyā-timiram

vara-nija-kāntyā jagatām aciram (3)

For a long time the hearts of the jīvas in this world
have been afflicted with ignorance due to māyā, which He
instantly destroys with His brilliant effulgence.



satata-virājita-nirupama-śobham

rādhā-mohana kalpita vilobham (4)

Rādhā-Mohana, having become greatly attracted to
Mahāprabhu whose unmatched splendor is always radiating
out, is broadcasting His glories to all.



Jaya Śacīnandana Jaya Gaurahari



jaya śacīnandana jaya gaurahari

gadādhara*-prāṇadhana nadīyā**-bihārī

jaya śacīnandana gaura-guṇākara

prema paraṣamaṇi bhāva-rasa sāgara

*(sometimes viṣṇupriyā prāṇadhana

or **saṅkīrtana bihārī)

Glory to Śacīnandana Gaurahari—who is the wealth of the
life of Gadadhara (*or Viṣṇupriyā, **or: who roams
around performing saṅkīrtana), performing His charming
pastimes in Navadvīpa. He possesses the topmost jewel,
the touchstone of prema, and is the ocean of the nectar
of ecstasy.




Śrī Gadādharāṣṭakam

Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī


                          238
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017



sva-bhaktiyoga-lāsinaṁ sadā vraje vihāriṇaṁ

hari-priyā-gaṇāgragaṁ śacī-suta-priyeśvaram

sa-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevana-prakāśakaṁ mahāśayaṁ

bhajāmy ahaṁ gadādharaṁ supaṇḍitaṁ guruṁ prabhum (1)

That personality who eternally wanders in Vraja while
playfully performing Her own loving devotional service,
(in other words, Śrī Rādhā, who is non-different from
Śrī Gadādhara Prabhu) is the chief among the beloved
damsels of Śrī Hari. As the foremost of the beloved
associates of the son of Śacī, he reveals the process of
service to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I worship that
magnanimous, exalted Paṇḍita and Guru, Śrī Gadādhara
Prabhu.



navojjvalādi-bhāvanā-vidhāna-karma-pāragaṁ

vicitra-gaura-bhakti-sindhu-rasabhaṅga-lāsinam

su-rāga-mārga-darśakaṁ vrajādi-vāsa-dāyakaṁ

bhajāmy ahaṁ gadādharaṁ supaṇḍitaṁ guruṁ prabhum (2)

He is fully conversant with the process of manifesting
the conceptions and moods of ever-fresh ujjvala-madhura
and other rasas. He is fully absorbed in sporting in the
waves of rasa within the ocean of astonishingly
variegated loving devotion to Śrī Gaura Hari. He is the
revealer of the foremost path of rāga-bhakti, and the
bestower of residence in Śrī Hari’s holy abodes, headed
by Vraja. I worship that exalted Paṇḍita and Guru, Śrī
Gadādhara Prabhu.



śacīsutāṅghri-sāra-bhakta-vṛnda-vandya-gauravaṁ

gaura-bhāva-citta-padma-madhya-kṛṣṇa-suvallabham

mukunda-gaura-rūpiṇaṁ sva-bhāva-dharma-dāyakaṁ

bhajāmy ahaṁ gadādharaṁ supaṇḍitaṁ guruṁ prabhum (3)

He is venerated and worshipped by the multitude of
bhaktas who have taken exclusive shelter of the lotus
feet of Śrī Śacīsuta. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is splendidly
situated within Śrī Gaura Hari’s lotus heart, which is
saturated with bhāva, is alone his dearmost beloved and
very life. Śrī Gadādhara Prabhu has bestowed upon
Mukunda, in His golden form as Śrī Gaura Hari, the
nature of the moods of his own heart—in other words, Śrī
Rādhā’s loving devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. I worship that
exalted Paṇḍita and Guru, Śrī Gadādhara Prabhu.



nikuñja-sevanādika-prakāśanaika-kāraṇaṁ

                          239
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


sadā sakhī-rati-pradaṁ mahā-rasa-svarūpakaṁ

sadāśritāṅghri-paṅkajaṁ śarīri-sad-guruṁ varaṁ

bhajāmy ahaṁ gadādharaṁ supaṇḍitaṁ guruṁ prabhum (4)

His sole purpose is to manifest the nature of sevā (to
Śrī Yugala-Kiśora) within the nikuñja. He bestows rati
for the moods and services of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sakhīs.
He is the original form of the foremost madhura-rasa. As
the best of sad-gurus, he always provides the protection
of his lotus feet to those who take his shelter. I
worship that exalted Paṇḍita and Guru, Śrī Gadādhara
Prabhu.



mahāprabhor mahā-rasa-prakāśanāṅkuraṁ priyaṁ

sadā mahā-rasāṅkura-prakāśanādi-vāsanāṁ

mahāprabhor vrajāṅganādi-bhāva-moda-kārakaṁ

bhajāmy ahaṁ gadādharaṁ supaṇḍitaṁ guruṁ prabhum (5)

He is dear to Mahāprabhu for having become the sprout
that burgeoned into (the tree of) mahā-rasa—the topmost
madhura-rasa. At the same time, he always desires to
assist in nourishing the sprout of that mahā-rasa (in
the heart of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu), and he therefore
gives pleasure to Him by assisting Him in relishing the
bhāvas of the vraja-gopīs. I worship that exalted
Paṇḍita and Guru, Śrī Gadādhara Prabhu.



dvijendra-vṛnda-vandya-pāda-yugma-bhakti-vardhakaṁ

nijeṣu rādhikātmatā-vapuḥ-prakāśanāgraham

aśeṣa-bhakti-śāstra-śikṣayojjvalāmṛta-pradaṁ

bhajāmy ahaṁ gadādharaṁ supaṇḍitaṁ guruṁ prabhum (6)

He promotes bhakti unto Śrī Gaura Hari’s lotus feet,
which are always worshiped by the host of exalted
brāhmaṇas. He is eager to reveal his own form as non-
different from Śrīmatī Rādhikā to those who are dear to
him (his personal associates). He bestows the immortal
nectar of ujjvala-rasa through his instructions, which
are extracted from the limitless bhakti-śāstras. I
worship that exalted Paṇḍita and Guru, Śrī Gadādhara
Prabhu.



mudā nija-priyādika-sva-pāda-padma-sīdhubhir

mahārasārṇavāmṛta-pradeṣṭa-gaura-bhaktidam

sadāṣṭa-sāttvikānvitaṁ nijeṣṭa-bhakti-dāyakaṁ

bhajāmy ahaṁ gadādharaṁ supaṇḍitaṁ guruṁ prabhum (7)

                          240
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


He joyfully bestows upon his close associates the
ambrosia of his lotus feet, together with the nectar
emanating from the great ocean of madhura-rasa and his
own cherished gaura-bhakti. He is always ornamented with
the aṣṭasāttvika-vikāras, and he awards devotion to his
iṣṭadeva (Śrī Gopīnātha). I worship that exalted Paṇḍita
and Guru, Śrī Gadādhara Prabhu.



yadīya-rīti-rāga-raṅgabhaṅga-digdha-mānaso

naro ‘pi yāti tūrṇam eva nāryabhāva-bhājanam

tam ujjvalākta-cittam etu citta-matta-ṣaṭpado

bhajāmy ahaṁ gadādharaṁ supaṇḍitaṁ guruṁ prabhum (8)

One who drowns in the waves of His practices of rāga-
bhakti quickly attains the qualification for the moods
of the Vraja damsels, whose minds are like intoxicated
bumblebees. Thus, the state of his mind also becomes
saturated with ujjvala-rasa. I worship that exalted
Paṇḍita and Guru, Śrī Gadādhara Prabhu.



mahārasāmṛta-pradaṁ sadā gadādharāṣṭakaṁ

paṭhet tu yaḥ subhaktito vrajāṅganā-gaṇotsavam

śacī-tanūja-pāda-padma-bhakti-ratna-yogyatāṁ

labheta rādhikā-gadādharāṅghri-padma-sevayā (9)

These eight verses in praise of Śrī Gadādhara bestow the
nectar of that great madhura-rasa, which is the festival
relished by the host of vraja-gopīs. Indeed, one who
regularly recites these verses with pure devotion
attains theservice of the lotus feet of Śrī Gadādhara,
who is none other than Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Through this
service, he can achieve eligibility for the jewel of
bhakti to the lotus feet of the son of Śacī.




Śrī Navadvīpāṣṭakam

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



śrī gauḍa-deśe sura-dīrghikāyās

tīre’ ti-ramye pura-puṇya-mayyāḥ

lasantam ānanda-bhareṇa nityaṁ,

taṁ śrī navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (1)

I am remembering Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, the beautiful,

                          241
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

virtuous land of Gaurasundara on the charming bank of
the Bhaghirathī. It is eternally shining and full of
bliss.



yasmai paravyoma vadanti kecit,

kecic ca goloka itīrayanti

vadanti vṛndāvanam eva taj-jñās

taṁ śrī navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (2)

I am remembering Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma. Some say it is the
spiritual sky, Vaikuṇṭhaloka; others say it is the
transcendental realm of Goloka; but those who have
realized the truth know it as Śrī Vṛndāvana Dhāma.



yaḥ sarva-dikṣu sphuritaiḥ suśītair

nānā-drumaiḥ sūpavanaiḥ parītaḥ

śrī gaura-madhyāhna-vihāra-pātrais

taṁ śrī navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (3)

I am remembering that Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, which is
pervaded by cool, gentle breezes and where sublime
groves with many kinds of shade trees manifested,
providing the setting for Gaurasundara’s mid-day līlās.



śrī svar-ṇadī yatra vihāra-bhūmiḥ,

suvarṇa-sopāna-nibaddha-tīrā

vyāptormibhir gaura-vagāha-rūpais

taṁ śrī navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (4)

I am remembering that Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, where the
celestial Mandakinī Gaṅgā flows with great pleasure. Her
banks have golden stairs (ghaṭas), and she becomes full
with high waves, dancing in joy when Gaurasundara takes
His bath in her waters.



mahanty anantāni gṛhāṇi yatra,

sphuranti haimāni manoharāṇi

pratyālayaṁ yaṁ śrayate sadā śrīs

taṁ śrī navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (5)

I am remembering that Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, with its
uncountable beautiful golden houses in which Lakṣmī-devī
always resides with the devotees. These houses are so
transcendentally charming that they automatically steal

                             242
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

the mind.



vidyā-dayā kṣānti-mukhaiḥ samastaiḥ,

sadbhir guṇair yatra janāḥ prapannāḥ

saṁstūyamānā ṛṣi-deva-siddhais

taṁ śrī navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (6)

I am remembering that Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, where the
perfected souls are ornamented by knowledge, compassion,
tolerance, sacrifice and all transcendental qualities‚
and who are glorified by the ṛṣis, demigods, and
siddhas.



yasyāntare miśra-purandarasya

sānanda-sāmyaika padaṁ nivāsaḥ

śrī gaura-janmādika-līlāḍhyas

taṁ śrī navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (7)

I am remembering that Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, where
Purandara Jagannātha Miśra resides with great pleasure,
where all varieties of bliss dwell in Gaurasundara’s
lotus feet, and where He performed His birth and other
sweet pastimes.



gauro bhraman yatra hariḥ sva-bhaktaiḥ

saṅkīrtana-prema-bhareṇa sarvam

nimajjayaty ullasad-unmadābdhau

taṁ śrī navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (8)

I am remembering that Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, where,
chanting the holy names with great love, Gaurahari
roamed with His own devotees, sinking them in the ocean
of ujjvala-rasa prema.



etan navadvīpa-vicintanāḍhyaṁ

padyāṣṭakaṁ prīta-manāḥ paṭhed yaḥ

śrīmac-chacī-nandana-pāda-padme

sudurlabhaṁ prema samāpnuyāt saḥ (9)

That person who daily recites and remembers with
affection this āṣṭakam to Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma achieves
the very rare jewel of prema and the lotus feet of my
Śrī Śacīnandana.


                          243
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam

Spoken by Satyavrata Muni in a conversation

with Nārada Ṛṣi and Śaunaka Ṛṣi in the Padma Purāṇa



namāmīśvaraṁ sac-cid-ānanda-rūpaṁ

lasat-kuṇḍalaṁ gokule bhrājamānam

yaśodā-bhiyolūkhalād dhāvamānaṁ

parām ṛṣṭam atyantato drutya gopyā (1)

I worship the Supreme Īśvara, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose form is
sac-cid-ānanda, whose fish-shaped earrings swing and
play upon His cheeks, who is supremely splendrous in the
transcendental dhāma of Gokula, who, due to breaking the
yoghurt pot, is very fearful of Mother Yaśodā and
jumping down from the wooden grinding mortar quickly
runs away, and who, chased by Yaśodā, who hastily runs
after Him, is ultimately caught from behind.



rudantaṁ muhur netra-yugmaṁ mṛjantaṁ

karāmbhoja-yugmena sātaṅka-netram

muhuḥ śvāsa-kampa-tri-rekhāṅka-kaṇṭha-

sthita-graiva-dāmodaraṁ bhakti-baddham (2)

I worship that Dāmodara who, afraid of the stick in His
mother’s hand, cries and time and again rubs His eyes
with both His lotus hands, whose eyes express extreme
fearfulness, whose sobbing makes the jeweled and pearl
necklaces upon His neck marked with three lines shake,
and whose belly is bound only by His mother’s devotion.



itīdṛk sva-līlābhir ānanda-kuṇḍe

sva-ghoṣaṁ nimajjantam ākhyāpayantam

tadīyeśita-jñeṣu bhaktair jitatvaṁ

punaḥ prematas taṁ śatāvṛtti vande (3)

By childhood pastimes such as this, He perpetually
immerses the inhabitants of Gokula in pools of pure
bliss, and through them informs the devotees desirous of
knowing His aspect of supreme opulence and majesty that
He is conquered only by those who are free from
knowledge of His aiśvarya—with great love I again and
again worship that Dāmodara Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


                          244
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



varaṁ deva! mokṣaṁ na mokṣāvadhiṁ vā

na cānyaṁ vṛṇe ’haṁ vareśād apīha

idaṁ te vapur nātha! gopāla-bālaṁ

sadā me manasy āvirāstāṁ kim anyaiḥ (4)

He Deva! Although You are capable of granting any boon,
I do not pray to You for liberation, eternal life in
Vaikuṇṭha, or for any other benediction [which may be
obtained by executing the nine processes of bhakti]. He
Nātha! May Your form as a cowherd boy in this Vṛndāvana
forever remain manifest in my heart—besides this what is
the use of any other benediction?



idaṁ te mukhāmbhojam avyakta-nīlair

vṛtaṁ kuntalaiḥ snigdha-raktaiś ca gopyā

muhuś cumbitaṁ bimba-raktādharaṁ me

manasy āvirāstām alaṁ lakṣa-lābhaiḥ (5)

He Deva! May Your lotus-like face which is framed by
Your cascading, glossy black curling locks, which is
kissed by Mother Yaśodā over and over again, and which
is beautified by lips as red as ripe bimba fruits,
always remain visible in my heart—millions of other
attainments are useless to me.



namo deva! dāmodarānanta viṣṇo!

prasīda prabho! duḥkha-jālābdhi-magnam

kṛpā-dṛṣṭi-vṛṣṭyāti-dīnaṁ batānu

gṛhāṇeśa! mām ajñam edhy akṣi-dṛśyaḥ (6)

Obeisances to You, O Deva! O Bhakta-Vatsala Dāmodara! O
Ananta, who are endowed with limitless potency! O all-
pervading Viṣṇu! O my master! O supremely independent
Iśa! Be pleased with me! I am sinking deeply into an
ocean of sorrow—favor me by showering the rain of Your
merciful glance upon this surrendered soul who am so
pitifully fallen and grant me Your direct darśana.



kuverātmajau baddha-mūrtyaiva yadvat

tvayā mocitau bhakti-bhājau kṛtau ca

tathā prema-bhaktiṁ svakāṁ me prayaccha

na mokṣe graho me ’sti dāmodareha (7)

He Dāmodara! Although You were bound to the mortar with

                          245
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

ropes tied by Mother Yaśodā, You mercifully liberated
the two sons of Kuvera who were cursed by Nārada to
stand as trees and gifted them with Your own prema-
bhakti. In the same way please bestow upon this
insignificant soul that same prema-bhakti. This is my
sole longing—I have no desire whatsoever for any other
type of liberation.



namas te ’stu dāmne sphurad dīpti-dhāmne

tvadīyodarāyātha viśvasya dhāmne

namo rādhikāyai tvadīya priyāyai

namo ’nanta-līlāya devāya tubhyam (8)

O Dāmodara! I offer praṇāma to the effulgent rope
binding Your waist. I also offer praṇāma to Your belly
which is the source of the Brahman effulgence and the
mainstay of the entire universe. Time and again I offer
praṇāma to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Your dearmost beloved, and I
also offer my praṇāmas hundreds of times unto Your
wondrous, unlimited pastimes.




Vasatu Mano Mama Madana-Gopāle

Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī



vasatu mano mama madana-gopāle

nava-rati-keli-vilāsa-parāvadhi-rādhā-surata-rasāle (1)

May my mind aḷways dwell on that very person, Madana
Gopāla. His ever-fresh pastimes of amorous play are the
ultimate limit of the ocean of rasa, especially when He
meets with Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



mada-śikha-piñcha-mukaṭa-parilāñchita-kuñcita-kaca-
nikurambe

mukharita-veṇu-hata-trapa-dhāvita-nava-nava-yuvatī-
kadambe (2)

When He plays upon His flute, the peacock feather
crowning His curly locks moves, looking very beautiful
like the tail-feathers of a dancing intoxicated peacock.
When He plays His flute, all the refreshingly beautiful
young gopīs drop everything – their shyness, their
chasity, their dharma, patience, etc – and come running
to Him in the forest.



kalita-kalindasutā-pulinojjvala-kalpa-mahīruha-mūle

                          246
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


kiṅkinī-kalarava-rañjita-kaṭitaṭa-komala-pīta-dukūle (3)

He is standing beneath a kadamba tree by the brilliant
sandbanks of Yamunā, playing His flute and dancing. He
wears a very fine yellow cloth and when He dances, the
bells on the chain around His waist jingle very sweetly
and steal the minds of all the gopīs.



muralī-manohara-madhuratarādhara-ghana-ruci-cora-kiśore

śrī-vṛṣabhānu-kumārī-mohana-ruci-mukhacandra-cakore (4)

May my mind dwell upon that budding youth whose luster
steals the glory of the thunderclouds of the rainy
season, and whose lips are most sweet and enchanting as
they vibrate upon the muralī. Oh! May I contemplate that
person who, like a cakora bird, is thirsty to drink the
rays of the lustrous moonlike face of the young daughter
of Vṛṣabhānu Rāja, seeing which He becomes bewildered
and faints.



guñjā-hāra-makara-maṇi-kuṇḍala-kaṅkana-nūpura-śobhe

mṛdu-madhura-smita-cāru-vilokana-rasikavadhū-kṛta-lobhe
(5)

May my mind contemplate the beauty of His anklebells,
bangles and bejewelled makara-shaped earrings as well as
His necklace of guñjā berries. O my mind, dwell upon He
who evokes greed within the hearts of the rasika
milkmaids of Vraja with His lovely glances and gentle
sweet smiles.



matta-madhuvrata-guñjita-rañjita-gala-dolita-vanamāle

gandhodvarttita-suvalita-sundara-pulakita-bāhu-viśāle
(6)

O my mind, please contemplate He who wears round his
neck a swaying garland of forest flowers which delights
the intoxicated humming bees. O mind, contemplate His
powerful arms which are massaged with fragrant unguents
and which beautifully ripple with bliss.



ujjvala-ratna-tilaka-lalitālaka-sa-kanaka-mauktika-nāse

śārada-koṭi-sudhā-kiraṇojjvala-śrī-mukha-kamala-vikāśe
(7)

O my mind! Dwell on His nose which has a pearl ornament
set in gold, upon His gracefully curling locks and His
brilliant bejewelled tilaka. Dear mind, contemplate His
face which blossoms like a lotus and which is effulgent
like millions of autumn moons.


                          247
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



grīvākaṭi-padabhaṅgi-manohara-nava-sukumāra-śarīre

vṛndāvana-nava-kūñja-gṛhāntara-ratiraṇa-raṅga-sudhīre
(8)

O my mind! Contemplate His captivating, ever-fresh,
extremely youthful body bent in three places.
Contemplate He who, though very grave, takes delight in
the battles of Cupid within the ever-fresh kuñjas of
Vṛndāvana.



parimala-sāra-sa-keśara-candana-carccitatara-lasad-aṅge

paramānanda-rasaika-ghanākṛti-pravahad-anaṅga-taraṅge
(9)

O mind, contemplate His lustrous body which is lavishly
anointed with sandal pulp mixed with saffron and which
is itself the very essence of fragrance. Dwell upon that
form from which the waves of Cupid flood forth and which
is solely constituted of the condensed mellows of the
highest bliss.



padanakha-candra-maṇi-cchavi-lajjita-manasija-koṭi-
samāje

adbhuta-keli-vilāsa-viśārada-vrajapura-navayuva-rāje
(10)

Dear mind, dwell on the effulgence emanating from the
jewel-like moons of His toenails, seeing which the
assembled multitudes of Kāmadevas become embarassed.
Contemplate this ever-new prince of Vraja who is most
adept in enacting astonishing erotic pastimes.



rasika-sarasvatī-varṇita-mādhava-rūpa-sudhā-rasa-sāre

ramayata sādhu budhā nija-hṛdayaṁ bhramatha mūḍhā kim
asāre (11)

May my mind dwell upon this nectarean form of Mādhava
which is the essence of all rasa, as described by the
rasika-bhakta Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī-pāda. Intelligent
men must derive bliss from it within their hearts for it
is very sublime, whereas fools wander in saṁsāra. For
them what else exists except temporary illusion?




Śrī Caurāgragaṇya-Puruṣāṣṭakam

Śrī Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura



                           248
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


vraje prasiddhaṁ navanīta-cauraṁ

gopāṅganānāṁ ca dukūla-cauram

aneka-janmārjita-pāpa-cauraṁ

caurāgragaṇyaṁ puruṣaṁ namāmi (1)

I offer praṇāma to that foremost of thieves—who is
famous in Vraja as the butter-thief and He who steals
the gopīs’ clothes, and who, for those who take shelter
of Him, steals the sins which have accrued over many
lifetimes.



śrī-rādhikāyā hṛdayasya cauraṁ

navāmbuda-śyāmala-kānti-cauram

padāśritānāṁ ca samasta-cauraṁ

caurāgragaṇyaṁ puruṣaṁ namāmi (2)

I offer praṇāma to the foremost of thieves—who steals
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s heart, who steals the dark luster of a
fresh raincloud, and who steals all the sins and
sufferings of those who take shelter of His feet.



akiñcanī-kṛtya padāśritaṁ yaḥ

karoti bhikṣuṁ pathi geha-hīnam

kenāpy aho bhīṣaṇa-caura īdṛg

dṛṣṭaḥ-śruto vā na jagat-traye ’pi (3)

He turns His surrendered devotees into paupers and
wandering, homeless beggars—aho! such a fearsome thief
has never been seen or heard of in all the three worlds.



yadīya nāmāpi haraty aśeṣaṁ

giri-prasārān api pāpa-rāśīn

āścarya-rūpo nanu caura īdṛg

dṛṣṭaḥ śruto vā na mayā kadāpi (4)

Mere utterance of His name purges one of a mountain of
sins—such an astonishingly wonderful thief I have never
seen or heard of anywhere!



dhanaṁ ca mānaṁ ca tathendriyāṇi

prāṇāṁś ca hṛtvā mama sarvam eva


                          249
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

palāyase kutra dhṛto ’dya caura

tvaṁ bhakti-dāmnāsi mayā niruddhaḥ (5)

He Thief! Having stolen my wealth, my honour, my senses,
my life and my everything, where can You run to? I have
caught You with the rope of my devotion.



chinatsi ghoraṁ yama-pāśa-bandhaṁ

bhinatsi bhīmaṁ bhava-pāśa-bandham

chinatsi sarvasya samasta-bandhaṁ

naivātmano bhakta-kṛtaṁ tu bandham (6)

You cut the terrible noose of Yamarāja, You sever the
dreadful noose of material existence, and You slash
everyone’s material bondage, but You are unable to cut
the knot fastened by Your own loving devotees.



man-mānase tāmasa-rāśi-ghore

kārāgṛhe duḥkha-maye nibaddhaḥ

labhasva he caura! hare! cirāya

sva-caurya-doṣocitam eva daṇḍam (7)

O stealer of my everything! He Thief! Today I have
imprisoned You in the miserable prison-house of my heart
which is very fearful due to the terrible darkness of my
ignorance, and there for a very long time You will
remain, receiving appropriate punishment for Your crimes
of thievery!



kārāgṛhe vasa sadā hṛdaye madīye

mad-bhakti-pāśa-dṛḍha-bandhana-niścalaḥ san

tvāṁ kṛṣṇa he! pralaya-koṭi-śatāntare ’pi

sarvasva-caura! hṛdayān nahi mocayāmi (8)

O Kṛṣṇa, thief of my everything! The noose of my
devotion remaining forever tight, You will continue to
reside in the prison-house of my heart because I will
not release You for millions of aeons. (This aṣṭaka is
recited in the poetic meter known as ‘Upajāti’.)




Śrī Nanda-Nandanāṣṭakam

An ancient prayer by an unknown Vaiṣṇava author


                          250
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017



sucāru-vaktra-maṇḍalaṁ sukarṇa-ratna-kuṇḍalam

sucarcitāṅga-candanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam (1)

I offer praṇāma to Śrī Nanda-nandana, whose face is
extremely lovely, from whose beautiful ears hang
jewelled earrings, and whose entire body is anointed
with fragrant candana.



sudīrgha-netra-paṅkajaṁ śikhi-śikhaṇḍa-mūrdhajam

anaṅga-koṭi-mohanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam (2)

I offer praṇāma to Śrī Nanda-nandana, whose elongated
eyes are beautiful like a fully-bloomed lotus, the top
of whose head is exquisitely adorned with peacock
feathers, and who enchants millions of Cupids
(Kāmadevas).



sunāsikāgra-mauktikaṁ svacchanda-danta-paṅktikam

navāmbudāṅga-cikkaṇaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam (3)

I offer praṇāma to Śrī Nanda-nandana, from whose
beautiful nose hangs an elephant-pearl, whose teeth are
brilliantly shining, and whose bodily complexion is more
beautiful and lustrous than a fresh raincloud.



kareṇa veṇu-rañjitaṁ gatī-karīndra-gañjitam

dukūla-pīta śobhanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam (4)

I offer praṇāma to Śrī Nanda-nandana, whose lotus hands
hold the flute, whose lingering gait defeats even that
of an intoxicated elephant, and whose dark limbs are
beautified by a yellow dhoṭī.



tri-bhaṅga-deha-sundaraṁ nakha-dyuti-sudhākaram

amūlya-ratna-bhūṣaṇaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam (5)

I offer praṇāma to Śrī Nanda-nandana, whose three-fold-
bending posture is exquisitely elegant, the effulgence
of whose toe-nails puts to shame even the moon, and who
wears invaluable jewels and ornaments.



sugandha-aṅga-saurabham uro-virāji-kaustubham

sphurac chrī-vatsa-lāñchanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam (6)

I offer praṇāma to Śrī Nanda-nandana, whose body exudes
an extraodinarily enchanting fragrance and upon whose

                          251
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

broad chest the kaustubha gem shines together with the
mark of Śrīvatsa.



vṛndāvana-sunāgaraṁ vilāsānuga-vāsasam

surendra-garva-mocanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam (7)

I offer praṇāma to Śrī Nanda-nandana, Vṛndāvana’s expert
lover who dresses in a manner that enhances His
charming, playful pastimes, and who pulverised the pride
of Indra.



vrajāṅganā-sunāyakaṁ sadā sukha-pradāyakam

jagan-manaḥ pralobhanaṁ namāmi nanda-nandanam (8)

I offer praṇāma to Śrī Nanda-nandana, who as the lover
of the Vraja gopīs perpetually delights them and who
enchants the minds of all living entities.



śrī-nanda-nandanāṣṭakaṁ paṭhed yaḥ śraddhayānvitaḥ

tared bhavābdhiṁ dustaraṁ labhet tad-aṅghri-yugmakam (9)

Whoever regularly recites this Śrī Nanda-nandanāṣṭakam
with deep faith will easily cross the seemingly
insurmountable ocean of material existence and attain
eternal residence at the lotus feet of Śrī Nanda-
nandana.




Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Candrāṣṭakam

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Goswāmī



ambudāñjanendra-nīla-nindi-kānti-ḍambaraḥ

kuṅkumodyad-arka-vidyud-aṁśu-divyad-ambaraḥ

śrīmad-aṅga-carcitendu-pītanākta-candanaḥ

svāṅghri-dāsyado ’stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ (1)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s effulgent bodily complexion defeats the
luster of a fresh monsoon cloud, añjana (collyrium used
to line the eyes), and blue sapphire; His yellow cloth
is more effulgent than kuṅkuma, the rising sun, and a
flash of lightning; and His entire form is anointed with
candana mixed with camphor and saffron. May that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, son of the king of the cowherd men, bestow upon
me the service of His lotus feet.



                          252
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017


gaṇḍa-tāṇḍavāti-paṇḍitāṇḍajeśa-kuṇḍalaś

candra-padma-ṣaṇḍa-garva-khaṇḍanāsya-maṇḍalaḥ

ballavīṣu vardhitātma-gūḍha-bhāva-bandhanaḥ

svāṅghri-dāsyado ’stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ (2)

On Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s cheeks dangle fish-shaped earrings which
are most expert in dancing, His face shatters the pride
of the full moon and all varieties of lotuses, and He
forever tightens the shackle of His secret moods of love
upon the Vraja gopīs. May that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, son of the
king of the cowherd men, bestow upon me the service of
His lotus feet.



nitya-navya-rūpa-veśa-hārda-keli-ceṣṭitaḥ

keli-narma-śarma-dāyi-mitra-vṛnda-veṣṭitaḥ

svīya-keli-kānanāṁśu-nirjitendra-nandanaḥ

svāṅghri-dāsyado ’stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ (3)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty, attire, ornaments, and love-laden
jolly pastimes are all forever fresh and new. When
playing, He is always surrounded by His friends who give
Him happiness with their joking words. The rays of light
emanating from His play-garden, Śrī Vṛndāvana, defeat
Indra’s heavenly Nandana garden. May that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, son
of the king of the cowherd men, bestow upon me the
service of His lotus feet.



prema-hema-maṇḍitātma-bandhutābhinanditaḥ

kṣauṇi-lagna-bhāla-lokapāla-pāli-vanditaḥ

nitya-kāla-sṛṣṭa-vipra-gauravāli-vandanaḥ

svāṅghri-dāsyado ’stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ (4)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is perpetually delighted by His friends whose
hearts are decorated with the gold of prema. He praises
those virtuous friends, is worshiped daily with
obeisances by the lords of the various planets, and,
although He Himself is the hero of unlimited universes,
He daily worships the brāhmaṇas and His elders at the
appropriate times. May that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, son of the king
of the cowherd men, bestow upon me the service of His
lotus feet.



līlayendra-kāliyoṣṇa-kaṁsa-vatsa-ghātakas

tat-tad-ātma-keli-vṛṣṭi-puṣṭa-bhakta-cātakaḥ

vīrya-śīla-līlayātma-ghoṣa-vāsi-nandanaḥ


                          253
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

svāṅghri-dāsyado ’stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ (5)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa effortlessly cooled the heat of Indra and
Kālīya-nāga, He easily killed Kaṁsa and Vatsāsura, the
raindrops of His playful pastimes such as smashing the
pride of Indra nourishes His cātaka-bird devotees, and
He delights the Vrajavāsīs with His valour, His pure
nature and His unalloyed pastimes. May that Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
son of the king of the cowherd men, bestow upon me the
service of His lotus feet.



kuñja-rāsa-keli-sīdhu-rādhikādi-toṣaṇas

tat-tad-ātma-keli-narma-tat-tad-āli-poṣaṇaḥ

prema-śīla-keli-kīrti-viśva-citta-nandanaḥ

svāṅghri-dāsyado ’stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ (6)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa pleases Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs with the
nectar of His pastimes in the kuñjas and with the rāsa-
līlā, He nourishes them with His jokes and tricks, and
He delights the hearts of everyone with His supernatural
prema, character, playfulness, and fame. May that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, son of the king of the cowherd men, bestow upon
me the service of His lotus feet.



rāsa-keli-darśitātma-śuddha-bhakti-sat-pathaḥ

svīya-citra-rūpa-veśa-manmathāli-manmathaḥ

gopikāsu netra-koṇa-bhāva-vṛnda-gandhanaḥ

svāṅghri-dāsyado ’stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ (7)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, through the performance of the rāsa-līla,
which is completely devoid of even a scent of mundane
lust, showed the true path of pure bhakti for Him; His
variegated beauty and attire agitates the hearts of all
classes of lovers; and from the corners of His eyes He
informs the gopīs of all His inner desires. May that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, son of the king of the cowherd men, bestow upon
me the service of His lotus feet.



puṣpa-cāyi-rādhikābhimarṣa-labdhi-tarṣitaḥ

prema-vāmya-ramya-rādhikāsya-dṛṣṭi-harṣitaḥ

rādhikorasīha lepa eṣa hāri-candanah

svāṅghri-dāsyado ’stu me sa ballavendra-nandanaḥ (8)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is always greedy to obtain the touch of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā as She goes to pick flowers; because
Rādhikā is so attractive due to Her loving crookedness,
He is always jubilant upon obtaining Her darśana; He is
like enchanting sandal paste which adorns Rādhikā’s
breast. May that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, son of the king of the

                          254
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

cowherd men, bestow upon me the service of His lotus
feet.



aṣṭakena yas tv anena rādhikā-suvallabhaṁ

saṁstavīti darśane ’pi sindhujādi-durlabham

taṁ yunakti tuṣṭa-citta eṣa ghoṣa-kānane

rādhikāṅga-saṅga-nanditātma-pāda-sevane (9)

By singing this aṣṭaka, whoever prays to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is the love of Rādhikā’s heart and whose darśana is not
possible even for the celestial goddesses headed by
Lakṣmī, will please not only Him, but also Rādhikā and
Her companions, and Kṛṣṇa will engage such a devotee in
the service of His lotus feet in Śrī Vṛndāvana. (This
aṣṭaka is sung in the poetic meter known as ‘Tūṇaka’.)




Śrī Madhurāṣṭakam

Śrīmad Vallabhācārya



adharaṁ madhuraṁ vadanaṁ madhuraṁ nayanaṁ madhuraṁ
hasitaṁ madhuram

hṛdayaṁ madhuraṁ gamanaṁ madhuraṁ madhurādhi-pater
akhilaṁ madhuram (1)

His lips are sweet, His face is sweet, His eyes are
sweet, His smile is sweet, His heart is sweet, His gait
is sweet—everything is sweet about the original Lord of
Sweetness.



vacanaṁ madhuraṁ caritaṁ madhuraṁ vasanaṁ madhuraṁ
valitaṁ madhuram

calitaṁ madhuraṁ bhramitaṁ madhuraṁ

madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ madhuram (2)

His voice is sweet, His character is sweet, His attire
is sweet, His speech is sweet, His movements are sweet,
His wandering is sweet—everything is sweet about the
original Lord of Sweetness.



veṇur madhuro reṇur madhuraḥ pāṇir madhuraḥ pādo
madhuraḥ

nṛtyaṁ madhuraṁ sakhyaṁ madhuraṁ madhurādhi-pater
akhilaṁ madhuram (3)


                          255
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

His flute is sweet, His foot-dust is sweet, His hands
are sweet, His feet are sweet, His dancing is sweet, His
friendship is sweet—everything is sweet about the
original Lord of Sweetness.



gītaṁ madhuraṁ pītaṁ madhuraṁ bhuktaṁ madhuraṁ suptaṁ
madhuram

rūpaṁ madhuraṁ tilakaṁ madhuraṁ madhurādhi-pater akhilaṁ
madhuram (4)

His singing is sweet, His drinking is sweet, His eating
is sweet, His sleeping is sweet, His beauty is sweet,
His tilaka is sweet—everything is sweet about the
original Lord of Sweetness.



karaṇaṁ madhuraṁ taraṇaṁ madhuraṁ haraṇaṁ madhuraṁ
ramaṇaṁ madhuram

vamitaṁ madhuraṁ śamitaṁ madhuraṁ madhurādhi-pater
akhilaṁ madhuram (5)

His deeds are sweet, His acts of deliverance are sweet,
His stealing is sweet, His amorous play is sweet, His
yawning is sweet, and even His chastisements are sweet—
everything is sweet about the original Lord of
Sweetness.



guñjā madhurā mālā madhurā yamunā madhurā vīcī madhurā

salilaṁ madhuraṁ kamalaṁ madhuraṁ madhurādhi-pater
akhilaṁ madhuram (6)

His garland of guñja is sweet, His garland is sweet, His
Yamunā River is sweet, and her waves, water, and lotuses
are all sweet—everything is sweet about the original
Lord of Sweetness.



gopī madhurā līlā madhurā

yuktaṁ madhuraṁ bhuktaṁ madhuram

hṛṣṭaṁ madhuraṁ śliṣṭaṁ madhuraṁ madhurādhi-pater
akhilaṁ madhuram (7)

His gopīs are sweet, His pastimes are sweet, His
paraphernalia and ornaments are sweet, His food is
sweet, His delight is sweet, His embrace is sweet—
everything is sweet about the original Lord of
Sweetness.



gopā madhurā gāvo madhurā yaṣṭir madhurā sṛṣṭir madhurā

dalitaṁ madhuraṁ phalitaṁ madhuraṁ madhurādhi-pater

                            256
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

akhilaṁ madhuram (8)

His gopas are sweet, His cows are sweet, His staff is
sweet, His creation is sweet, His defeating of demons is
sweet, and His bestowal of fruits is sweet—everything is
sweet about the original Lord of Sweetness.




Lalita-Lavaṅga

(Gīta Govinda, Song 3)

Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī



lalita-lavaṅga-latā-pariśīlana-komala-malaya-samīre

madhukara-nikara-karambita-kokila-kūjita-kuñja-kuṭīre
(1)

How enchanting springtime is when the Malayan breeze
arrives and impetuously embraces the tender clove
creepers. The kuñjas resound with the humming of bumble-
bees and the sweet kuhu of the cuckoos.




Refrain: viharati harir iha sarasa vasante

nṛtyati yuvati janena samaṁ sakhi virahi janasya durante

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is blithely enjoying with some fortunate
maidens, dancing in a festival of love. O friend, alas!
This springtime causes endless agony for deserted
lovers.



unmada madana manoratha pathika vadhū jana janita vilāpe

ali kula saṅkula kusuma samūha nirākula bakula kulāpe
(2)

Priya Sakhī! When husbands are long absent, lonely
wives, excited by kāma, continuously lament in
separation. The mālatī trees are thick with flowers
while honeybees swarm around the profuse bakula flowers.

mṛgamada saurabha rabhasa vasaṁvada navadala māla tamāle

yuvajana hṛdaya vidāraṇa manasija nakha ruci kiṁśuka
jāle (3)

Adorned with new leaves, the tamāla trees delight in
diffusing their musk-like fragrance in all directions.
Sakhi, look! These lustrous palāśa flowers resemble the
fingernails of Kāmadeva, tearing at young hearts.”


                          257
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017



madana mahīpati kanaka daṇḍa ruci kesara kusuma vikāse

milita śilimukha pāṭali paṭalakṛta smaratūṇa vilāse (4)

The saffron pistils of the nāga-keśara flowers are like
the golden scepters of the King of Love and the trumpet
(pāṭali) flowers surrounded by bumble-bees appear to be
his quiver.



vigalita lajjita jagadava lokana taruṇa karuṇa kṛtahāse

virahini kṛntana kunta mukhakṛti ketaka danturitāśe (5)

Sakhī! The trees bursting into bloom, compassionately
laugh at a world becoming shameless under the influence
of spring. The spiked ketakis, brightly blossoming in
all directions, pierce the hearts of forlorn lovers.



mādhavikā parimala lalite navamālika jāti sugandhau

muni manasām api mohana kāriṇi taruṇākaraṇa bandhau (6)

Scents of charming mādhavikā mingling with perfumed
nava-mālikā (jasmine) blooms bewilder even great sages.
This springtime is the natural friend of the young.



sphurad ati muktalatā parirambhaṇa mukulita pulakita
cūte

vṛndāvana vipine parisara parigata yamunā jala pūte (7)

Hey Sakhī! Trembling with rapture from the embrace of
the restless Mādhavī vines, the mango trees burst with
new buds. Yamunā’s pure waters flow nearby where Śrī
Hari rejoices with lovely damsels in the groves of
Vṛndāvana.



śrī jayadeva bhaṇitam idam udayati hari caraṇa smṛti
sāram

sarasa vasanta samaya vana varṇanam anugata madana
vikāram (8)

Śrī Jayadeva sings   of the beauty of the Springtime
forest, undergoing   ecstatic transformations of love. May
his auspicous song   awaken remembrance of the lotus feet
of Śrī Hari in the   devotees’ hearts.




Rati Sukha Sāre


                            258
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

(Gīta Govinda, Song 11)

Śrī Jayadeva Gosvami



rati-sukha-sāre gatam abhisāre madana-manohara-veśam

na kuru nitambini gamana-vilambanam anusara taṁ
hṛdayeśam (1)

Dressed for love’s delight, the lord of Your heart
awaits You in place perfect for amour. O full-hipped
girl! Do not delay. Go to Him at once.



dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre vasati vane vana-mali

pīna payodhara parisara mardana cañcala karayugaśālī
(refrain)

Vanamālī, with hands always restless to press the gopīs’
breasts, sits in the woods along the Yamunā where the
southern breezes gently waft.



nāma-sametaṁ kṛta-saṅketaṁ vādayate mṛdu-veṇum

bahu manute ’tanu te tanu-saṅgata-pavana-calitam api
reṇum (2)

Gently He plays the flute, calling Your sweet name. He
cherishes breeze-blown pollen that touched Your body.



patati patatre vicalati patre śaṅkita-bhavad-upayānam

racayati śayanaṁ sacakita-nayanaṁ paśyati tava panthānam
(3)

When a bird feather falls or a leaf stirs, He thinks You
have come. He makes the bed of love and anxiously
watches for Your arrival.



mukharam adhīraṁ tyaja mañjīraṁ ripum iva keli-sulolam

cala sakhi kuñjaṁ satimira-puñjaṁ śīlaya nīla-nicolam
(4)

O friend, remove Your noisy anklets which betray Your
amorous play. Don this dark cloak and hasten to the dark
bower.



urasi murārer upahita-hāre ghana iva tarala-balāke

taḍid iva pīte rati-viparīte rājasi sukṛta-vipāke (5)


                          259
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Soon You will reap Your reward from pious deeds. Your
garlands will fall on Murāri’s chest like white cranes
against a dark cloud. Shining lightening over Him, You
will rule in the climax of love.



vigalita-vasanaṁ parihṛta-raśanaṁ ghaṭaya jaghanam
apidānam

kisalaya-śayane paṅkaja-nayane nidhim iva harṣa-nidhānam
(6)

O lotus-eyed one! Loosen Your clothes and untie Your
belt. Place the treasured jewel of Your thighs on the
bed of tender shoots. It will give Him much pleasure.



harir abhimāṇī rajanir idānīm iyam api yāti virāmam

kuru mama vacanaṁ satvara-racanaṁ pūraya madhu-ripu-
kāmam (7)

Hari is proud. The night is about to end. Do as I
advise. Hasten now and fulfill Madhuripu’s desires.



śrī-jayadeve kṛta-hari-seve bhaṇati parama-ramaṇīyam

pramudita-hṛdayaṁ harim atisadayaṁ namata sukṛta-
kamanīyaṁ (8)

Reciting this enchanting poetry penned by Śrī Hari’s
servant Jayadeva, bow down to Him who is most charming,
merciful and blissful, and in whom all virtues find
their final function.



Śrī Vraja-Rāja-Sutāṣṭakam

An ancient prayer by an unknown Vaiṣṇava



nava-nīrada-nindita-kānti-dharaṁ

rasa-sāgara-nāgara-bhūpa-varaṁ

śubha-vaṅkima-cāru-śikhaṇḍa-śikhaṁ

bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam (1)

Just worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of Vraja,
who is a treasure-house of priceless jewels! His
complexion is more effulgent than a fresh raincloud; He
is the king of paramours and the ocean of rasa; His
crown is adorned with a lovely peacock feather
auspiciously tilted to the left (bowing towards Śrī
Radhā’s feet).



                            260
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


bhru-viśaṅkita-vaṅkima-śakra-dhanuṁ

mukha-candra-vinindita-koṭi-vidhum

mṛdu-manda-suhāsya-subhāṣya yutaṁ

bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam (2)

Just worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of Vraja,
who is a treasure-house of priceless jewels! His arched
eyebrows belittle the rainbow (the bow of Indra); His
pure moonlike face, which dwarfs millions of moons, is
adorned with an enchanting soft smile and fine speech.



suvikampad-anaṅga-sad-aṅga-dharaṁ

vraja-vāsī-manohara-veśa-karam

bhṛśa-lāñchita-nīla-saroja dṛśaṁ

bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam (3)

Just worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of Vraja,
who is a treasure-house of priceless jewels! (Cupid’s
body was burned by the anger of Lord Śiva, but) Kṛsna’s
trembling form is the true body of Cupid; He dresses
enchantingly in a way that fascinates the Vrajavāsīs; He
is adorned with extraordinary eyes like blue lotus
blossoms.



alakāvali-maṇḍita-bhāla taṭaṁ

śruti-dolita-mākara-kuṇḍalakam

kaṭi-veṣṭita-pīta-paṭam sudhaṭaṁ

bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam (4)

Just worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of Vraja,
who is a treasure-house of priceless jewels! His
forehead is surrounded by curling locks of hair; swaying
fish-shaped earrings dangle from His ears; His waist is
adorned with meticulously arranged yellow silk which
embraces His charming hips.



kala-nūpura-rājita-cāru-padaṁ

maṇi-rañjita-gañjita-bhṛṅga-madam

dhvaja vajra jhaṣāṅkita-pāda-yugaṁ

bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam (5)

Just worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of Vraja,
who is a treasure-house of priceless jewels! Tinkling
anklebells resound on His beautiful feet; He glows with
jeweled ornaments; His spirited behavior mocks the

                          261
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

intoxication of honey bees; His soles are marked with
the flag, thunderbolt, fish and other charming symbols.



bhṛśa-candana-carcita-cāru-tanuṁ

maṇi-kaustubha-garhita-bhānu-tanum

vraja-bāla-śiromaṇi-rūpa-dhṛtaṁ

bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam (6)

Just worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of Vraja,
who is a treasure-house of priceless jewels! His
graceful body is generously smeared with sandalwood
paste; His glowing Kaustubha gem overshadows the sun; He
has appeared as the crown jewel among the young boys of
Vraja.



sura-vṛnda-suvandya-mukunda-hariṁ

sura-nātha-śiromaṇi-sarva-gurum

giridhāri-murāri-purāri-paraṁ

bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam (7)

Just worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of Vraja,
who is a treasure-house of priceless jewels! He is the
Supreme Lord Hari, Mukunda, who is worshiped by all the
demigods and sages; He is the crest-jewel of all
controllers and the guru of all beings; He is the lifter
of Giri Govardhana, the killer of the Mura demon, and
the master of Lord Śiva.



vṛṣabhānu-sutā-vara-keli-paraṁ

rasa-rāja-śiromaṇi-veśa-dharam

jagad-īśvaram-īśvaram-īḍya-varaṁ

bhaja kṛṣṇa-nidhiṁ vraja-rāja-sutam (8)

Just worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of Vraja,
who is a treasure-house of priceless jewels! He is
dedicated to amorous escapades with the daughter of
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, impeccably dressing as the king of
enjoyers of rasa; He is the supreme monarch and the most
worshipable Lord of the entire creation.




Śrī Kuñja Bihārī Aṣṭakam

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvami



                           262
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


indranīla-maṇi-mañjula-varṇaḥ

phulla-nīpa-kusumāñcita-karṇaḥ

kṛṣṇalābhir akṛśorasi hārī

sundaro jayati kuñja-vihārī (1)

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who enjoys transcendental
pastimes in Vṛndāvana forest. His complexion is as
splendid as sapphires. He wears kadamba blossom
earrings, and his broad chest is decorated with a
garland of guñjā berries.



rādhikā-vadana-candra-cakoraḥ

sarva-ballava-vadhū-dhṛti-cauraḥ

carcarī-caturatāñcita-cārī

cāruto jayati kuñja-vihārī (2)

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who enjoys transcendental
pastimes in Vṛndāvana forest. He is the cakora bird that
drinks the moonlight of Śrī Rādhā’s face. He steals away
the composure of all the gopīs. Skillfully clapping his
hands in the rhythm known as carcarī, he dances very
gracefully.



sarvataḥ prathita-kaulika-parva-

dhvaṁsanena hṛta-vāsava-garvaḥ

goṣṭha-rakṣaṇa-kṛte giridhārī

līlayā jayati kuñja-vihārī (3)

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who enjoys transcendental
pastimes in Vṛndāvana forest. He stopped his relatives
from performing the famous sacrifice. He removed Indra’s
pride, and to protect the people of Vraja he playfully
lifted Govardhana hill.



rāga-maṇḍala-vibhūṣita-vaṁśī-

vibhrameṇa madanotsava-śaṁsī

stūyamāna-caritaḥ śuka-śārī-

śreṇibhir jayati kuñja-vihārī (4)

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who enjoys transcendental
pastimes in Vṛndāvana forest. His pastimes are glorified
by the parrots. By decorating his flute with many
beautiful melodies, he glorifies the festival of his
transcendental amorous love.


                             263
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



śātakumbha-ruci-hāri-dukūlaḥ

keki-candraka-virājita-cūlaḥ

navya-yauvana-lasad-vraja-nāri-

rañjano jayati kuñja-vihārī (5)

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who enjoys transcendental
pastimes in Vṛndāvana forest. The luster of his silk
garments eclipses the glory of gold. The top of his head
is decorated with a peacock feather. He pleases the
splendid girls of Vraja.



sthāsakī-kṛta-sugandhi-paṭīraḥ

svarṇa-kañci-pariśobhi-kaṭīraḥ

rādhikonnata-payodhara-vārī-

kuñjaro jayati kuñja-vihārī (6)

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who enjoys transcendental
pastimes in Vṛndāvana forest. He is anointed with
fragrant sandal paste. His hips are decorated with a
golden belt. He is the elephant bound by the rope of the
raised breasts of Śrī Rādhikā.



gaura-dhātu-tilakojjvala-bhālaḥ

keli-cañcalita-campaka-mālaḥ

adri-kandara-gṛhesv abhisāri

subhruvām jayati kuñja-vihārī (7)

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who enjoys transcendental
pastimes in Vṛndāvana forest. His forehead is splendid
with golden dhatu tilaka. His campaka garland moves to
and fro in his pastimes. He meets the beautiful-
eyebrowed gopis in the palatial caves of Govardhana
hill.



vibhramoccala-dṛg-añcala-nṛtya-

kṣipta-gopa-lalanākhila-kṛtyaḥ

prema-matta-vṛṣabhānu-kumārī-

nāgaro jayati kuñja-vihārī (8)

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who enjoys transcendental
pastimes in Vṛndāvana forest. His dancing sidelong
glances make the gopis drop all their household duties.
He is the charming lover of Vṛṣabhānu’s daughter, who is
mad with love for him.

                          264
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017




aṣṭakaṁ madhura-kuñja-vihārī-

krīḍayā paṭhati yaḥ kila hāri

sa prayāti vilasat-para-bhāgaṁ

tasya pāda-kamalārcana-rāgam (9)

He who reads these eight verses, which are beautified by
the Lord’s charming pastimes in the forest, will attain
many splendid transcendental virtues. He will become
attached to the service of the Lord’s lotus feet.



Śrī Keśavāṣṭaka

Eight Prayers Glorifying Śrī Keśava

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



nava-priyaka-mañjarī-racita-karṇa-pūra-śriyaṁ

vinidratara-mālatī-kalita-śekhareṇojjvalam

darocchvasita-yūthikā-grathita-valgu-vaikakṣakaṁ

vraje vijayinaṁ bhaje vipina-deśataḥ keśavam (1)

With fresh kadamba buds adorning His ears, strings of
fully blossomed mālatī flowers forming a crown upon His
head, and a brāhmaṇa thread of slightly opened and
charming jasmine flowers slung around His neck, He
returns from the forest to the village of Vraja - I
worship that Śrī Keśava.



piśaṅgi maṇikastani praṇata-śṛṅgi piṅgekṣaṇe

mṛdaṅga-mukhi dhūmale śabali haṁsi vaṁśi priye

iti sva-surabhī-kulaṁ taralam āhvayantaṁ mudā

vraje vijayinaṁ bhaje vipina-deśataḥ keśavam (2)

Coming back from the forest to the village of Vraja, He
happily calls His straying surabhi cows: “Piśāṅgī!
Maṇikastanī! Praṇataśṛṅgī! Piṅgekṣaṇā! Mṛdaṅgamukhī!
Dhūmalā! Śabalī! Haṁsī! Vaṁsī! Priyā!” I worship that
Śrī Keśava.



ghana-praṇaya-medhurān madhura-narma-goṣṭhi-kalā-

vilāsa-nilayān milad-vividha-veśa-vidyotinaḥ

sakhīn akhila-sārayā pathiṣu hāsayantaṁ girā

                          265
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


vraje vijayinaṁ bhaje vipina-deśataḥ keśavam (3)

Coming back from the forest on the pathways of Vraja, He
laughs and jokes with His affectionate friends, who are
all expert in the pleasantries of jesting, dancing and
singing, and who are splendidly dressed and decorated -
I worship that Śrī Keśava.

4

śramāmbu-kaṇikāvalī-dara-vilīḍha-gaṇḍāntaraṁ

samūḍha-giri-dhātubhir likhita-cāru-patrāṅkuram

udañcad-ali-maṇḍalī-dyuti-viḍambi-vakrālakaṁ

vraje vijayinaṁ bhaje vipina-deśataḥ keśavam (4)

His cheeks brilliant with beads of perspiration, His
face decorated with pictures drawn in mineral dyes from
the hill, and His splendid curling locks of hair
deriding the attractiveness of a swarm of black bees
restless for honey, He returns from the forest to the
village of Vraja - I worship that Śrī Keśava.



xt nibaddha-nava-tarṇakāvali-vilokanotkaṇṭhayā

naṭat-khura-puṭāñcalair alaghubhir bhuvaṁ bhindatīm

kalena dhavalā-ghaṭaṁ laghu nivartayantaṁ puro

vraje vijayinaṁ bhaje vipina-deśataḥ keśavam (5)

As He returns from the forest to the village of Vraja,
with the sweet sound of His flute He calls the surabhi
cows who, eager to see their young calves, break the
ground with their heavy, dancing hooves - I worship that
Śrī Keśava.



padāṅka-tatibhir varāṁ viracayantam adhva-śriyaṁ

calat-tarala-naicikī-nicaya-dhūli-dhūmra-srajam

marul-lahari-cañcalī-kṛta-dukūla-cūḍāñcalaṁ

vraje vijayinaṁ bhaje vipina-deśataḥ keśavam (6)

Coming back from the forest to the village of Vraja, He
beautifies the path with His footprints. His garland of
forest flowers is colored by the dust kicked up by the
cows running ahead of Him and His garments and peacock
feather move with the waves of the wind. - I worship
that Śrī Keśava.



vilāsa-muralī-kala-dhvanibhir ullasan-mānasāḥ

kṣaṇād akhila-ballavīḥ pulakayantam antar gṛhe

                          266
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


muhur vidadhataṁ hṛdi pramuditāṁ ca goṣṭheśvsarīṁ

vraje vijayinaṁ bhaje vipina-deśataḥ keśavam (7)

With the playful and sweet music of His flute elating
all the house-bound gopīs, whose bodily hairs rise up
with delight, and also making His mother Yaśodā joyous
at heart He comes back from the forest to the village of
Vraja - I worship that Śrī Keśava.

upetya pathi sundarī-tatibhir ābhir abhyarcitaṁ

smitāṅkura-karambitair naṭad-apaṅga-bhaṅgīśataiḥ

stana-stavaka-sañcaran-nayana-cañcarīkāñcalaṁ

vraje vijayinaṁ bhaje vipina-deśataḥ keśavam (8)

As He returns from the forest to the village of Vraja,
the gopīs mount the roofs of their palaces and with
garlands of dancing glances and gentle smiles greet Him,
whose vision drifts over their breasts like a bumblebee
hovering amongst a cluster of flowers - I worship that
Śrī Keśava.



idaṁ nikhila-ballavī-kula-mahotsavollāsanaṁ

krameṇa kila yaḥ pumān paṭhati suṣṭhu padyāṣṭakam

tam ujjvala-dhiyaṁ sadā nija-padāravinda-dvaye

ratiṁ dadhad acañcalāṁ sukhayatād viśākhā-sakhaḥ (9)

May Viśākhā’s friend Kṛṣṇa make happy for all time those
who attentively read these eight poetic verses, which
are a great festival of bliss for all the gopīs, by
making the readers' intelligence shine with unwavering
love for His lotus feet.



Jaya Jaya Sundara Nanda-Kumāra

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



Refrain

jaya jaya sundara nanda-kumāra

All glories to You, O beautiful son of Nanda!



saurabha-saṅkaṭa, vṛndāvana-taṭa, vihita-vasanta-vihāra
(1)

You engage in Your vasanta pastimes in Vṛndāvana, which
is fragrant with flowers.


                          267
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



abhinava-kuṭmala, guccha-samujjvala, kuñcita-kuntala-
bhāra (2)

You look very beautiful with Your curling hair decorated
with a brilliantly shining crown made of sprigs of fresh
new leaves.



praṇayi janerita, candana-sahakṛta, cūrṇita-vara-ghana-
sāra (3)

Your body smeared with candana and colored with red
powders thrown by Your beloveds, defeats the beauty of a
fresh rain-cloud.



caṭula-dṛg-añcala, racita-rasoccala, rādhā-madana-vikāra
(4)

Your restless sidelong glance causes anurāginī Śrī
Rādhikā to undergo the ecstatic transformations of
unlimited amorous desires.



bhuvana-vimohana, mañjula narttana, gati-valgita-maṇi-
hāra (5)

Your exquisite dancing charms the whole universe while
causing Your necklace to sway to and fro on Your chest.



adhara-virājita, mandatara-smita, locita-nija-parivāra
(6)

The sweet gentle smile on Your lips incites greed in the
gopīs’ hearts.



nija-ballabha-jana, suhṛt-sanātana, citta-viharad-
avatāra (7)

You are the eternal well-wisher of Your beloved devotees
and You descend to play in their hearts. [Or: You are
always playing in the heart of my dearmost guru and
friend, Sanātana Gosvāmī.]




(Kṛṣṇa) Deva! Bhavantaṁ Vande

Śrila Rūpa Gosvāmī



Śrīla Rūpa (kṛṣṇa) deva! bhavantaṁ vande

                          268
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


man-mānasa-madhukaram arpaya nija-pada-paṅkaja-makarande

O Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa! I am offering a prayer to You.
Please let the bee of my mind be offered the nectarean
honey of Your lotus feet. In other words, please let it
have a taste of the rasa of those lotus feet so that it
will then never be attracted to anything else!



yadyapi samādhiṣu vidhir api paśyati, na tava nakhāgra-
marīcim

idam icchāmi niśamya tavācyuta! tad api kṛpādbhuta-vīcim
(1)

Although Brahmā in full samādhi cannot catch a glimpse
of even a ray of the effulgence from the tips of Your
toe-nails, still he Acyuta! having heard of the waves of
Your astonishing mercy, I long to receive Your grace.



bhaktir udañcati yadyapi mādhava! na tvayi mama tila-
mātrī

parameśvaratā tad api tavādhika, durghaṭa-ghaṭana-
vidhātrī (2)

O Mādhava! Although I don’t possess even a sesame seed
of bhakti for You, still, by Your inconceivable power
which makes the impossible possible, please fulfill the
desires of my heart.



ayam avilolatayādya sanātana, kalitādbhuta-rasa-bhāram

nivasatu nityam ihāmṛta-nindini, vindan madhurima-sāram
(3)

He Sanātana! Because Your lotus feet are filled with
such wonderful rasa, let the bee of my mind always
reside unwaveringly in that nectar which puts everything
else to shame, for they are the essence of all sweetness
—this is my only prayer.




Gītam—Śrī Śrī Rādhikā Pāda-Padme Vijñapti

Śrila Rūpa Gosvāmī



rādhe! jaya jaya mādhava-dayite!

gokula-taruṇī-maṇḍala-mahite (1)

O Śrīmatī Rādhike! O beloved of Mādhava! O You whose
glories are sung by the young maidens of Gokula-maṇḍala!

                          269
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

All glories to You! All glories to You!



dāmodara-rati vardhana-veśe!

hari-niṣkuṭa-vṛndāvipineśe! (2)

From the effulgence of the tips of Your toes to the top
of Your head, Your artistic dress and entire appearance
increase Dāmodara’s loving attachment for You! O queen
of the forest of Vṛndāvana! O pleasure garden of Śrī
Hari!



vṛṣabhānūdadhi-nava-śaśi-lekhe!

lalitā-sakhi! guṇa-ramita-viśākhe! (3)

Just as the moon was produced from the churning of the
Milk Ocean, You have arisen like the new moon from the
ocean of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja’s affection for You. O
dearmost friend of Lalitā! O You who have captivated the
heart of Your intimate sakhī Viśākhā with Your charming
(lalita) qualities of friendship, kindness and loyalty
to Kṛṣṇa!



karuṇāṁ kuru mayi karuṇā-bharite!

sanaka-sanātana-varṇita-carite! (4)

O Karuṇa-mayī, all-compassionate one! Even naiṣṭhika-
brahmacārīs like Sanaka and Sanātana (who have described
Your aṣṭa-kālīya līlā in the Vedas, as well as
Bhīṣmadeva and Śukadeva Gosvāmī) meditate on Your
transcendental qualities and character. O Śrī Rādhe!
Bestow Your kindness upon me!




Śrī Rādhā-Kṛpā-Kaṭākṣa-Stava-Rāja

Spoken by Śiva to Gaurī in the Urdhvāmnāya-tantra



munīndra-vṛnda-vandite tri-loka-śoka-hāriṇī

prasanna-vaktra-paṇkaje nikuñja-bhū-vilāsini

vrajendra-bhānu-nandini vrajendra-sūnu-saṅgate

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (1)

O Śrīmatī Rādhikā—Śukadeva, Nārada, Uddhava, and all the
topmost munis are always offering vandanā (prayers) to
Your lotus feet. Remembering You and praying for Your
sevā miraculously removes all the miseries, sins, and
offenses of the three spheres. Your joyful face blooms

                          270
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

like a lotus and You delight in pastimes in the kuñjas
of Vraja. You are the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja and
are the dearly beloved of Brajendra-nandana, with whom
You always perform vilāsa—when, oh when will You bestow
upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?



aśoka-vṛkṣa-vallarī-vitāna-maṇḍapa-sthite

pravāla-vāla-pallava-prabhāruṇāṇghri-komale

varābhaya-sphurat-kare prabhūta-sampadālaye

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (2)

You dwell in a pavilion made of creepers climbing upon
aśoka trees; Your soft lotus feet are like lustrous red
coral, newly-sprouted leaves, and the rising sun; Your
lotus hands are always eager to fulfill the cherished
aspiration of Your devotees and to grant the benediction
of fearlessness; You are the abode of profuse divine
treasures and opulences—O Śrīmatī Rādhike, when, oh when
will You bestow upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?



anaṅga-raṅga-maṅgala-prasaṅga-bhaṅgura-bhruvāṁ

savibhramaṁ sasambhramaṁ dṛganta-bāṇa-pātanaiḥ

nirantaraṁ vaśī-kṛta-pratīti-nanda-nandane

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (3)

In the immensely auspicious drama enacted with loving
playfulness (prema-vilāsa) on the amorous battlefield,
Your eyebrows curving like bows suddenly unleash the
arrows of Your side-long glances, piercing Nanda-nandana
with amorous delusion and bringing Him into reverential
submission. In this way He eternally comes under Your
complete control—O Rādhike, when, oh when will You
bestow upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?



taḍit-suvarṇa-campaka-pradīpta-gaura-vigrahe

mukha-prabhā-parāsta-koṭi-śāradendu-maṇḍale

vicitra-citra-sañcarac-cakora-śāva-locane

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (4)

The glistening, fair complexion of Your limbs is like
lightning, gold, and campaka flowers; the shining
brilliance of Your face defeats even the effulgence of
millions of autumnal full moons; and Your eyes, restless
like cakora birds, display astonishingly new and
wonderful expressions at every moment—O Śrīmatī Rādhike,
when, oh when will You bestow upon me Your merciful
sidelong glance?



                          271
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


madonmadāti-yauvane pramoda-māna-maṇḍite

priyānurāga-rañjite kalā-vilāsa-paṇḍite

ananya-dhanya-kuñja-rājya-kāma-keli-kovide

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (5)

You are intoxicated with the beauty of Your own youth
and are always adorned with Your pre-eminent ornament,
Your delightful sulking mood (māna). You take delight in
Your darling’s love for You, and are supremely expert in
the art of loving affairs. In the incomparable realm of
wonderful kuñjas, You are the most learned in all of
love’s novelties—O Śrīmatī Rādhike, when, oh when will
You bestow upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?



aśeṣa-hāva-bhāva-dhīra-hīra-hāra-bhūṣite

prabhūta-śāta-kumbha-kumbha-kumbhi kumbha-sustani

praśasta-manda-hāsya-cūrṇa-pūrṇa-saukhya-sāgare

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (6)

You are adorned with all Your various deep emotions
[anurāga, dhirādhira, kila-kincita, etc.] for Kṛṣṇa
which shine on Your person like a diamond necklace. Your
lovely breasts are like twin golden water-pots and the
cranial globes of Jaya-nandinī (the wife of Indra’s
elephant-carrier Airāvata). Displaying Your acclaimed
mild smile, You are like an ocean overflowing with
divine bliss—O Rādhike, when, oh when will You bestow
upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?



mṛṇāla-vāla-vallarī taraṅga-raṅga-dor-late

latāgra-lāsya-lola-nīla-locanāvalokane

lalal-lulan-milan-manojña mugdha-mohanāśrite

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (7)

Your soft arms are like fresh, delicate lotus stems
elegantly swaying in the waves. Just as a creeper dances
in a gust of wind, Your restless bluish eyes flash an
enthralling glance. Your charm entices Madana Mohana
Himself to follow after You, and when meeting, You steal
away His mind and then give Him shelter in His
spellbound condition—O Śrīmatī Rādhike, when, oh when
will You bestow upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?



suvarṇa-mālikāñcita-tri-rekha-kambu-kaṇṭhage

tri-sūtra-maṅgalī-guṇa-tri-ratna-dīpti-dīdhiti

salola-nīla-kuntala prasūna-guccha-gumphite

                          272
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (8)

Your neck, as beautiful as a lovely conch, is decorated
with golden necklaces and marked with three lines;
ornaments made with glistening jewels of three colors
swing from Your trisūtra (three auspicious cords tied
around the neck of a newly-married bride), and Your
black tresses, which are woven with clusters of colorful
flower blossoms, sway to and fro—O Rādhike, when, oh
when will You bestow upon me Your merciful sidelong
glance?



nitamba-bimba-lambamāna-puṣpa-mekhalā-guṇe

praśasta-ratna-kiṅkiṇī-kalāpa-madhya mañjule

karīndra-śuṇḍa-daṇḍikā-varoha-saubhagoruke

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (9)

Your rounded hips are decorated with dangling flowers
and tiny tinkling jewel-bells hang from the flower belt
on Your charmingly slender waist. The jingling of those
gem-bells is exceedingly enchanting. Your beautiful
thighs taper like the sloping trunk of the king of
elephants—O Śrīmatī Rādhike, when, oh when will You
bestow upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?



aneka-mantra-nāda-mañju-nūpurā-rava-skhalat

samāja-rāja-haṁsa-vaṁśa-nikvaṇāti-gaurave

vilola-hema-vallarī-viḍambi-cāru-caṅkrame

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (10)

Your captivating golden ankle bells sweetly resound with
a host of Vedic mantras, resembling the warbling of a
flock of royal swans, and as You walk along, the beauty
of Your limbs mocks the grace of undulating golden
creepers—O Śrīmatī Rādhike, when, oh when will You
bestow upon me Your merciful sidelong glance?



ananta-koṭi-viṣṇu-loka-namra-padmajārcite

himādrijā-pulomajā-viriñcajā-vara-prade

apāra-siddhi-ṛddhi-digdha-sat-padāṅgulī-nakhe

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam? (11)

You are worshiped by Śrī Lakṣmī, the goddess of
unlimited millions of Vaikuṇṭha planets. Śrī Pārvatī,
Indrāṇī (Indra’s wife), and Sarasvatī all worship and
attain benedictions from You. Meditation on even one of
Your toenails grants an infinite variety of perfections.
There is no need to pray to anyone else, only You—O

                          273
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

Śrīmatī Rādhike, when will You bestow upon me Your
merciful sidelong glance?



makheśvari! kriyeśvari svadheśvari sureśvari

triveda-bhāratīśvari pramāṇa-śāsaneśvari

rameśvari! kṣameśvari pramoda-kānaneśvari

vrajeśvari vrajādhipe śrī rādhike namo ’stu te (12)

You are the mistress of all kinds of sacrifices
(especially of the topmost yugala- milana-yajña); of all
actions (since You are the root of all potencies—mūla-
śakti-tattva); of the mantras uttered at yajñas and of
the sacrificial offerings presented to the demigods; of
all the demigods; of the words of the three Vedas; of
the enforcement of all scriptural principles; of Śrī
Ramā-devī (the goddess of fortune); of Śrī Kṣamā-devī
(the goddess of forgiveness); and especially of the
delightful kuñjas in Vṛndāvana. When will You mercifully
make me Your dāsī and grant me the qualification to
render service in Your amorous pastimes with the prince
of Vraja? He Śrīmatī Rādhike, owner (adhikārinī—
vrajeśvarī) and maintainer (vrajadhipe) of Vraja! I
offer praṇāmas unto You time and again.



itīmam adbhutaṁ-stavaṁ niśamya bhānu-nandinī

karotu santataṁ janaṁ kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-bhājanam

bhavet tadaiva-sañcita-tri-rūpa-karma-nāśanaṁ

bhavet tadā vrajendra-sūnu-maṇḍala-praveśanam (13)

He Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī! Upon hearing this wonderful
prayer, please make me the perpetual object of Your
merciful glance. Then, by the influence of Your mercy,
may all the reactions to my karma be destroyed and,
realizing my internal identity as a mañjarī, may I enter
the circle of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sakhīs to participate in
Śrī Vrajendra-sūnu’s eternal pastimes.




Śrī Rādhikāṣṭakam (1)

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



diśi diśi racayantīṁ sañcaran-netra-lakṣmī-

vilasita-khuralībhiḥ khañjarīṭasya khelām

hṛdaya-madhupa-mallīṁ ballavādhīśa-sūnor

akhila-guṇa-gambhīrāṁ rādhikām arcayāmi (1)

                          274
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


I worship that Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose restless eyes,
moving like flocks of khañjarīṭa birds (wagtails),
playfully wander in all directions, constantly searching
out Her prey, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Upon sighting Him, like an
expert hunter She casts the arrows of Her provocative,
sidelong glances. She is the jasmine flower for the
bumblebee Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Just as the jasmine elates the
bumblebee, She gives great joy to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart,
completely making Him Hers. She is very mysterious with
Her countless deep qualities.



pitur iha vṛṣabhānor anvavāya-praśastiṁ

jagati kila samaste suṣṭhu vistārayantīm

vraja-nṛpati-kumāraṁ khelayantīṁ sakhībhiḥ

surabhiṇi nija-kuṇḍe rādhikām arcayāmi (2)

I worship that Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who wonderfully
increases the fame of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja’s dynasty here
in Vraja and throughout the world by inducing the Prince
of Vraja to give up His royal behavior and openly sport
in a carefree manner with Her and all the sakhīs in Her
fragrant kuṇḍa.



śarad-upacita-rākā-kaumudī-nātha-kīrti-

prakara-damana-dīkṣā-dakṣiṇa-smera-vaktrām

naṭad-aghabhid-apāṅgottuṅgitānaṅga-raṅgām

kalita-ruci-taraṅgāṁ rādhikām arcayāmi (3)

I worship that Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose smiling, blooming
lotus face expertly belittles the vast glory of the
brilliant śarad full moon, the lord of the night-
blooming kumud lotus, and diminishes the beauty of all
the other gopīs [just as guru by dīkṣā cuts the pride of
his disciple]; whose pure amorous desires are aroused by
Aghabhid Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dancing sidelong glances; and who
is endowed with waves of beauty, grace and charm.



vividha-kusuma-vṛndotphulla-dhammilla-dhāṭī-

vighaṭita-mada-ghūrṇat keki-piccha-praśastiṁ

madhuripu-mukha-bimbodgīrṇa-tāmbūla-rāga-

sphurad-amala-kapolāṁ rādhikām arcayāmi (4)

I worship that Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose braided hair,
beautifully adorned with clusters of many varieties of
fully blossomed flowers, forcibly attacks and reproaches
the fame of the tail-feathers of an intoxicated, dancing
peacock; whose pure, unblemished cheeks are reddish and
very lustrous from the juice of the tāmbūla remnants

                          275
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

from Madhuripu Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s bimba-fruit lips.



amalina-lalitāntaḥ sneha-siktāntaraṅgām

akhila-vidha-viśākhā-sakhya-vikhyāta-śīlām

sphurad-aghabhid-anargha-prema-māṇikya-peṭīṁ

dhṛta-madhura-vinodāṁ rādhikām arcayāmi (5)

I worship that Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose heart is always
saturated with Lalitā-sakhī’s pure, unrestrained
affection; whose sublime nature is made more famous due
to sharing intimate friendship with Viśākhā-sakhī; who
is a treasure-chest wherein She conceals the glistening,
priceless ruby of Aghabhid Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s prema; who bathes
and dresses in Her own beauty and sweetness (Her
different bhāvas for Śrī Kṛṣṇa).



atula-mahasi vṛndāraṇya-rājye ’bhiṣiktāṁ

nikhila-samaya-bhartuḥ kārtikasyādhidevīm

aparimita-mukunda-preyasī-vṛnda-mukhyāṁ

jagad-agha-hara-kīrtiṁ rādhikām arcayāmi (6)

I worship that Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is enthroned as the
queen of the incomparable festive and supreme abode, Śrī
Vṛndāvana; who is the presiding goddess of Kārttika, the
king of months; who is the foremost of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
innumerable beloveds; and whose fame, which destroys
sins, instills desire to serve Kṛṣṇa.



hari-pada-nakha-koṭī-pṛṣṭha-paryanta-sīmā-

taṭam api kalayantīṁ prāṇa-koṭer abhīṣṭam

pramudita-madirākṣī-vṛnda-vaidagdhya-dīkṣā-

gurum ati-guru-kīrtiṁ rādhikām arcayāmi (7)

I worship that Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who considers just the
outermost extremity of the very edge of the tips of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s toes to be millions of times dearer than Her own
life. Indeed, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Her very life and She knows
nothing other than Him. Famous as the supreme initiating
guru for the joyful gopīs, whose beautiful eyes are
intoxicated with prema, She instructs them in the arts
of cleverly serving Kṛṣṇa.



amala-kanaka-paṭṭodghṛṣṭa-kāśmīra-gaurīṁ

madhurima-laharībhiḥ samparītāṁ kiśorīm

hari-bhuja-parirabdhāṁ labdha-romāñca-pāliṁ

                          276
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


sphurad-aruṇa-dukūlāṁ rādhikām arcayāmi (8)

I worship that Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose fair complexion
resembles saffron which has been ground upon a slab of
pure gold; whose youthful pastimes are filled with
endless waves of sweetness; whose hairs stand on end in
bliss upon being embraced by Śrī Kṛṣṇa; whose dress is
the colour of the rising sun.



tad-amala-madhurimṇāṁ kāmam ādhāra-rūpaṁ

paripaṭhati variṣṭhaṁ suṣṭhu rādhāṣṭakaṁ yaḥ

ahima-kiraṇa-putrī-kūla-kalyāṇa-candraḥ

sphuṭam akhilam abhīṣṭaṁ tasya tuṣṭas tanoti (9)

Those who lovingly and deeply recite this wonderful
Rādhikāṣṭakam, which embodies Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s pure
sweetness, will please the moon of all auspiciousness,
Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, who is playing on the banks of the
Yamunā with Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Kṛṣṇa Himself will cause
the lotus flower of the desire to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā
to bloom in their hearts. (This aṣṭaka is recited in the
poetic meter known as ‘Mālinī’.)




Śrī Rādhikāṣṭakam (2)

Śrīmad Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī



rasa-valita-mṛgākṣī-mauli-māṇikya-lakṣmīḥ

pramudita-mura-vairi-prema-vāpī-marālī

vraja-vara-vṛṣabhānoḥ puṇya-gīrvāṇa-vallī

snapayati nija-dāsye rādhikā māṁ kadā nu (1)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the brilliant jewel in the crown of
rasika maidens. She is the swan which floats upon the
pond of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s joy-filled prema, and is the
paramount wish-fulfilling creeper of Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja’s piety. When will that Śrīmatī Rādhikā bathe
me in Her service?



sphurad-aruṇa-dukūla-dyotitodyan-nitamba-

sthalam abhi-vara-kāñci-lāsyam ullāsayantī

kuca-kalasa-vilāsa-sphīta-muktā-sara-śrīḥ

snapayati nija-dāsye rādhikā māṁ kadā nu (2)


                          277
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Around Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s shapely hips which are
exquisitely covered with a radiant, reddish silken
cloth, an excellent golden chain sings and dances; and
upon Her water-pot-like breasts rests a magnificent
pearl necklace. When will that Śrīmatī Rādhikā bathe me
in Her service?



sarasija-vara-garbhākharva-kāntiḥ samudyat-

taruṇima-ghanasārāśliṣṭa-kaiśora-sīdhuḥ

dara-vikasita-hāsya-syandi-bimbādharāgrā

snapayati nija-dāsye rādhikā māṁ kadā nu (3)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s effulgence is like that of the whorl
(kārnikā) of an exquisite budding lotus flower; Her pre-
adolescence is like nectar mixed with the fleetingly
fragrant camphor of Her early teen age, and Her slightly
smiling bimba-fruit-like lips display a touch of hāsya
rasa (humor). When will that Śrīmatī Rādhikā bathe me in
Her service?



ati-caṭulataraṁ taṁ kānanāntar milantaṁ

vraja-nṛpati-kumāraṁ vīkṣya śaṅkā-kulākṣī

madhura-mṛdu-vacobhiḥ saṁstutā netra-bhaṅgyā

snapayati nija-dāsye rādhikā māṁ kadā nu (4)

Unexpectedly meeting the whimsical prince of Vraja in
the forest, Śrīmatī Rādhikā beholds Him with
apprehensive eyes. Then, with Her sweet, soft words and
crooked glances, She elicits an intimate exchange with
Him. When will that Śrīmatī Rādhikā bathe me in Her
service?



vraja-kula-mahilānāṁ prāṇa-bhūtākhilānāṁ

paśupa-pati-gṛhiṇyāḥ kṛṣṇa-vat prema-pātram

sulalita-lalitāntaḥ sneha-phullāntarātmā

snapayati nija-dāsye rādhikā māṁ kadā nu (5)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the very life of all the Vraja
maidens. Like Śrī Kṛṣṇa, She is the fortunate recipient
of Śrī Yaśodā’s affection, and Her heart is bursting
with the charming intimate affection of Lalitā-sakhī.
When will that Śrīmatī Rādhikā bathe me in Her service?



niravadhi sa-viśākhā śākhi-yūtha-prasūnaiḥ

srajam iha racayantī vaijayantīṁ vanānte


                          278
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

agha-vijaya-varoraḥ preyasī śreyasī sā

snapayati nija-dāsye rādhikā māṁ kadā nu (6)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā embodies the supreme auspiciousness; She
resides in Śrī Vṛndāvana always accompanied by Viśākhā-
sakhī with whom She prepares vaijayantī garlands made
from the flowers of the various trees and is therefore
most dear to the wonderful chest of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
subduer of the Agha demon (Agha-Vijaya). When will that
Śrīmatī Rādhikā bathe me in Her service?



prakaṭita-nija-vāsaṁ snigdha-veṇu-praṇādair

druta-gati-harim ārāt prāpya kuñje smitākṣī

śravaṇa-kuhara-kaṇḍūṁ tanvatī namra-vaktrā

snapayati nija-dāsye rādhikā māṁ kadā nu (7)

With the sound of His charming flute, Śrī Kṛṣṇa reveals
His presence within a kuñja, and She quickly runs to
Him. Catching sight of Him, with smiling half-closed
eyes, She lowers Her head and, on some pretext,
scratches Her ear. When will that Śrīmatī Rādhikā bathe
me in Her service?



amala-kamala-rāji-sparśi-vāta-praśīte

nija-sarasi nidāghe sāyam ullāsinīyam

parijana-gaṇa-yuktā krīḍayantī bakāriṁ

snapayati nija-dāsye rādhikā māṁ kadā nu (8)

On summer nights in the waters of Her own kuṇḍa, cool
due to the gentle breeze which caresses the many
spotless lotuses there, She very joyfully engages Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in water-sports in the company of Lalitā and Her
other sakhīs. When will that Śrīmatī Rādhikā bathe me in
Her service?



paṭhati vimala-cetā mṛṣṭa-rādhāṣṭakaṁ yaḥ

parihṛta-nikhilāśā-santatiḥ kātaraḥ san

paśupa-pati-kumāraḥ kāmam āmoditas taṁ

nija-jana-gaṇa-madhye rādhikāyās tanoti (9)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa will become so pleased with that person of
pure heart and mind who, abandoning all hopes and
aspirations other than rādhā-dāsya, humbly recites this
pure Rādhikāṣṭakam that He will grant them entrance into
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s eternal entourage. (This aṣṭaka is
recited in the poetic meter known as ‘Mālinī’.)



                          279
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017




Śrī Rādhikāṣṭakam (3)

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī



kuṅkumākta-kāñcanābja-garvahāri-gaurabhā

pītanāñcitābja-gandha-kīrti nindi-saurabhā

ballaveśa-sūnu-sarva-vāñchitārtha-sādhikā

mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā (1)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s bodily complexion snatches away the
pride of a golden lotus flower tinged with kuṅkuma, Her
bodily fragrance reproaches the fame of a fragrant lotus
sprinkled with saffron powder, and She fulfills all the
desires of the prince of Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. May that
Śrīmatī Rādhikā always bestow upon me the service of Her
lotus feet.



kauravinda-kānti-nindi-citra-paṭṭa-śāṭikā

kṛṣṇa-matta-bhṛṅga-keli-phulla-puṣpa-vāṭikā

kṛṣṇa-nitya-saṅgamārtha-padma-bandhu-rādhikā

mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā (2)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s dazzling, colorful silk sārī defeats
the splendour of coral; She is a garden of all varieties
of blooming flowers which attract the maddened bumblebee
Śrī Kṛṣṇa who comes to play amongst Her flowers, and She
worships the sun-god in order to meet with Kṛṣṇa
eternally. May that Śrīmatī Rādhikā always bestow upon
me the service of Her lotus feet.



saukumārya-sṛṣṭa-pallavāli-kīrti-nigrahā

candra-candanotpalendu-sevya-śīta-vigrahā

svābhimarṣa-ballavīśa-kāma-tāpa-bādhikā

mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā (3)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s softness defeats the fame of delicate
budding flowers; Her body’s coolness is worshipable for
the moon, sandalwood-paste, the lotus, and camphor; and
Her touch dispels the heat of Gopī-jana-vallabha Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s amorous desires. May that Śrīmatī Rādhikā always
bestow upon me the service of Her lotus feet.



viśva-vandya-yauvatābhivanditāpi yā ramā


                          280
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

rūpa-navya-yauvanādi-sampadā na yat-samā

śīla-hārda-līlayā ca sā yato ’sti nādhikā

mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā (4)

Although Lakṣmī-devī is honoured by all the worshipable
damsels of the universe, the opulence of her great
beauty and ever-fresh youthfulness is overshadowed by
that of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Nor can Lakṣmī-devī surpass Her
by her natural loving and playful disposition. May that
Śrīmatī Rādhikā always bestow upon me the service of Her
lotus feet.



rāsa-lāsya-gīta-narma-sat-kalāli-paṇḍitā

prema-ramya-rūpa-veśa-sad-guṇāli-maṇḍitā

viśva-navya-gopa-yoṣid-ālito ’pi yādhikā

mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā (5)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is paṇḍitā (expert) in all the celestial
arts of the rāsa-līlā, like dancing, singing, and
joking; She is adorned with supernatural prema,
enchanting beauty, wonderful dresses and ornaments, and
all divine virtues; and She is the topmost youthful
maiden of Vraja. May that Śrīmatī Rādhikā always bestow
upon me the service of Her lotus feet.



nitya-navya-rūpa keli-kṛṣṇa-bhāva-sampadā

kṛṣṇa-rāga-bandha-gopa-yauvateṣu kampadā

kṛṣṇa-rūpa-veśa-keli-lagna-sat-samādhikā

mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā (6)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā, by Her ever-fresh beauty, ever-fresh
playfulness, and ever-fresh wealth of affection, causes
all the young maidens of Vraja, who are bound in love to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, to tremble in anxiety; and She is immersed in
samādhi upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty, attire, and playful
pastimes. May that Śrīmatī Rādhikā always bestow upon me
the service of Her lotus feet.



sveda-kampa-kaṇṭakāśru-gadgadādi-sañcitā

marṣa-harṣa-vāmatādi-bhāva-bhūṣaṇāñcitā

kṛṣṇa-netra-toṣi-ratna-maṇḍanāli-dādhikā

mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā (7)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā in divine ecstasy manifests
perspiration, hairs standing on end, trembling, tears,
and a choked voice; She is adorned with indignation,
joy, and contrariness; and She wears splendid jewel-

                          281
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

studded ornaments which delight Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eyes. May
that Śrīmatī Rādhikā always bestow upon me the service
of Her lotus feet.



yā kṣaṇārdha-kṛṣṇa-viprayoga-santatoditā-

neka-dainya-cāpalādi-bhāva-vṛnda-moditā

yatna-labdha-kṛṣṇa-saṅga-nirgatākhilādhikā

mahyam ātma-pāda-padma-dāsya-dāstu rādhikā (8)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā, upon being separated from Śrī Kṛṣṇa for
even half a moment, becomes distressed by the ever-
arising feelings of Her own lowliness and great
restlessness; and She is relieved of all Her mental
anguish upon meeting Kṛṣṇa through the intense efforts
of one of Their messengers. May that Śrīmatī Rādhikā
always bestow upon me the service of Her lotus feet.



aṣṭakena yas tv anena nauti kṛṣṇa-vallabhāṁ

darśane ’pi śailajādi-yoṣid āli-durlabhām

kṛṣṇa-saṅga-nanditātma-dāsya-sīdhu-bhājanaṁ

taṁ karoti nanditāli-sañcayāśu sā janam (9)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose darśana is rarely attained even
by Pārvatī-devī and other goddesses, who gives great
pleasure to Her sakhīs, who Herself becomes elated upon
meeting with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and who is Kṛṣṇa’s dearest
lover, very quickly makes that person who prays to Her
singing this aṣṭaka a recipient for the nectar of Her
service. (This aṣṭaka is recited in the poetic meter
known as ‘Tūṇaka’.)




Kalayati Nayanaṁ

Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda



kalayati nayanaṁ diśi diśi valitam

paṅkajam iva mṛdu-māruta-calitam (1)

Rādhā’s eyes move in all directions like a lotus moving
in a gentle breeze.



keli-vipinaṁ praviśati rādhā

pratipada-samudita-manasija-bādhā (2)


                          282
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

Tortured by ever-increasing amorous desires, Rādhā
enters the pastimes forest.



vinidadhati mṛdu-manthara-pādaṁ

racayati kuñjara-gatim anuvādam (3)

She walks with gentle, slow steps as gracefully as an
elephant.



janayati rudra-gajādhipa-muditaṁ

rāmānanda-rāya-kavi-gaditam (4)

May these words spoken by the poet Rāmānanda Rāya bring
happiness to Gajapati Mahārāja Pratāparudra.




Śrī Gāndharvā-Samprārthanāṣṭakam

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



vṛndāvane viharator iha keli-kuñje

matta-dvipa-pravara-kautuka-vibhrameṇa

sandarśayasva yuvayor vadanāravinda-

dvandvaṁ vidhehi mayi devi! kṛpāṁ prasīda (1)

O Devī Rādhike! You and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are constantly
enjoying Your ambrosial amorous pastimes in the leafy
pleasure-groves of Vṛndāvana, like the intoxicated king
of elephants sporting with his queen elephant.
Therefore, O Gāndharvike! Be pleased with me and
mercifully grant me darśana of Your and Your beloved
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus-like faces.



hā devi! kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vācā

yāce nipatya bhuvi daṇḍavad udbhaṭārtiḥ

asya prasādam abudhasya janasya kṛtvā

gāndharvike! nija-gaṇe gaṇanāṁ vidhehi (2)

O Devī Gāndharvike! I am suffering greatly, and
therefore today I throw myself on the ground like a
stick and humbly implore You with a choked voice to be
merciful to this fool and please count me as one of Your
own.



                          283
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


śyāme! ramā-ramaṇa-sundaratā-variṣṭha-

saundarya-mohita-samasta-jagaj-janasya

śyāmasya vāma-bhuja-baddha-tanuṁ kadāhaṁ

tvām indirā-virala-rūpa-bharāṁ bhajāmi? (3)

He Śyāme! Your Master is even more charming than
Nārāyaṇa Bhagavān and His beauty enchants the entire
creation. You are always in His arm’s embrace on His
left side, and Your beauty can never be equalled, even
by that of Lakṣmī-devī. When will I properly worship
Your beauty?



tvāṁ pracchadena mudira-cchavinā pidhāya

mañjīra-mukta-caraṇāṁ ca vidhāya devi!

kuñje vrajendra-tanayena virājamāne

naktaṁ kadā pramuditām abhisārayiṣye? (4)

O Devī Rādhike! When will I become Your sakhī, and,
pleasing You by dressing Your transcendental form in a
raincloud-coloured sārī and removing the anklets from
Your feet, lead You away to a gorgeous kuñja for a
nocturnal rendezvous with Śrī Nanda-nandana?



kuñje prasūna-kula-kalpita-keli-talpe

saṁviṣṭayor madhura-narma-vilāsa-bhājoḥ

loka-trayābharaṇayoś caraṇāmbujāni

saṁvāhayiṣyati kadā yuvayor jano ’yam? (5)

O Devī! Within a kuñja You and Śrī Kṛṣṇa lie on a bed of
so many kinds of flowers which is a playground for Your
sweet amorous amusement. When will I receive the
opportunity to serve the lotus feet of You and Your
beloved, who together are the very adornment of the
three worlds? Oh, when will such an auspicious day come?



tvat-kuṇḍa-rodhasi vilāsa-pariśrameṇa

svedāmbu-cumbi-vadanāmburuha-śriyau vām

vṛndāvaneśvari! kadā taru-mūla-bhājau

saṁvījayāmi camarī-caya-cāmareṇa? (6)

O Vṛndāvaneśvari! After enjoying amorous play with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa on the bank of Your kuṇḍa, Your lotus faces
brilliantly decorated with drops of perspiration, You
will both relax upon a jewelled siṁhāsana beneath a
desire tree. When You are in that condition, when will I

                          284
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

be able to soothe You by fanning You with a cāmara?



līnāṁ nikuñja-kuhare bhavatīṁ mukunde

citraiva sūcitavatī rucirākṣi! nāham

bhugnāṁ bhruvaṁ na racayeti mṛṣā-ruṣāṁ tvām

agre vrajendra-tanayasya kadā nu neṣye? (7)

O beautiful-eyed Rādhike! When You playfully hide in a
secret place within a kuñja and Śrī Kṛṣṇa comes to know
where You are hiding and approaches You, You will ask
me, “He Rūpa-mañjarī! Why did you show Kṛṣṇa My hiding-
place?” Then I will reply, “No, no, I didn’t tell Him;
it was Citra Sakhī. Therefore please do not frown at
me.” When will I speak these entreating words to You,
while seeing You standing before Kṛṣṇa and accusing me?
When will such a day come?

vāg-yuddha-keli-kutuke vraja-rāja-sūnuṁ

jitvonmadām adhika-darpa-vikāsi-jalpām

phullābhir ālibhir analpam udīryamāṇa-

stotrāṁ kadā nu bhavatīm avalokayiṣye? (8)

When You defeat Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a playful war of words, You
become immensely joyful and boast of Your victory to
Your girlfriends. Then the sakhīs will express their
delight by exclaiming, “Jaya Rādhe! Jaya Rādhe!” Oh,
when will I become fortunate enough to participate in
Your victory chorus?



yaḥ ko ’pi suṣṭhu vṛṣabhānu-kumārikāyāḥ

samprārthanāṣṭakam idaṁ paṭhati prapannaḥ

sā preyasā saha sametya dhṛta-pramodā

tatra prasāda-laharīm urarī-karoti (9)

Any surrendered soul who with great faith recites these
eight appeals to the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja will
receive direct darśana of Her accompanied by Her beloved
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and feel the waves of Her happiness shower
upon him. (This aṣṭaka is recited in the poetic meter
known as ‘Vasantatilakā’.)




Śrī Rādhā-Prārthanā

Śrī Viṭhalācārya




                          285
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

kṛpayati yadi rādhā bādhitāśeṣa-bādhā

kim apara-viśiṣṭaṁ puṣṭi-maryādayor me

yadi vadati ca kiñcit smera-hāsodita-śrīr

dvija-vara-maṇi-paṅktyā mukti-śuktyā tadā kim (1)

If Śrīmatī Rādhikā is merciful to me, then all obstacles
to my devotion will be removed. There will be nothing
more for me to attain because I will have received the
fruits offered by the paths of both vaidhī-mārga and
rāga-mārga. And if She will speak to me while smiling
gently, I will see Her brilliant rows of teeth which are
like lines of priceless jewels. Having seen them one
time, the goal of gaining liberation from material
existence will be rendered insignificant.



śyāmasundara śikhaṇḍa-śekhara

smera-hāsa muralī-manohara

rādhikā-rasika māṁ kṛpā-nidhe

sva-priyā-caraṇa-kiṅkarīṁ kuru (2)

He Śyāmasundara! O Śikhaṇḍa-śekhara (whose head is
adorned with peacock feathers)! Your face is always
graced with a playful smile, Your flute-playing is
enchanting, and You are so expert in relishing rasa with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Because You are an ocean of mercy, I am
appealing to You to please make me a kiṅkarī
(maidservant) at the feet of Your beloved.

prāṇanātha-vṛṣabhānu-nandinī-

śrī-mukhābja-rasalola-ṣaṭpada

rādhikā-pada-tale kṛta-sthitiṁ

tvāṁ bhajāmi rasikendra-śekhara (3)

You are the Lord of the life of the daughter of
Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja and are like a bee who is always
eager to taste the nectar of Her lips. O Rasika-śekhara,
foremost of those who are rasika! I don’t desire
anything other than to always reside at the feet of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



saṁvidhāya daśane tṛṇaṁ vibho

prārthaye vraja-mahendra-nandana

astu mohana tavāti-vallabhā

janma-janmani mad-īśvarī priyā (4)

He Nanda-nandana! O all-pervading Prabhu! O You who
enchant my mind, and indeed, the minds of all! Taking a
piece of straw in my teeth, I humbly entreat You that

                             286
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

She, who is the love of Your life, will remain my dear
worshipable goddess birth after birth.




Śrī Rādhā-Stotram

From the conversation between Brahmā and Nārada in the
Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa



gṛhe rādhā vane rādhā rādhā pṛṣṭhe puraḥ sthitā

yatra yatra sthitā rādhā rādhaivārādhyate mayā (1)

Rādhā is in the home, Rādhā is in the forest, and She is
both behind and before me. I worship the all-pervading
Rādhājī, wherever She is present.



jihvā rādhā śrutau rādhā rādhā netre hṛdi sthitā

sarvāṅga-vyāpinī rādhā rādhaivārādhyate mayā (2)

Rādhā is on my tongue, Rādhā is in my ears, Rādhā is in
my eyes and inside my heart. I worship Rādhājī, who is
within the bodies of all.



pūjā rādhā japo rādhā rādhikā cābhivandane

smṛtau rādhā śiro rādhā rādhaivārādhyate mayā (3)

Rādhā is in my pūjā, Rādhā is in my mantra-japa, Rādhā
is in my prayers, Rādhā is in my memory, and Rādhā is in
my head—I worship that Rādhājī.



gāne rādhā guṇe rādhā rādhikā bhojane gatau

ratrau rādhā divā rādhā rādhaivārādhyate mayā (4)

Whenever I sing, I sing about the qualities of Rādhā,
everything I eat is Rādhā’s prasāda, wherever I go I
always remember Rādhā, Rādhā is in the night, Rādhā is
in the day – I worship that Rādhājī.

mādhurye madhurā rādhā mahattve rādhikā guruḥ

saundarye sundarī rādhā rādhaivārādhyate mayā (5)

Rādhā is the sweetness within anything that is sweet; of
anything that is important, Rādhā is the most important;
and of everything that is beautiful, Rādhā is the
supreme beauty—I worship that Rādhājī.




                          287
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

rādhā rasa-sudhā-sindhu rādhā saubhāgya-mañjarī

rādhā vrajāṅganā-mukhyā rādhaivārādhyate mayā (6)

Rādhā is an ocean of nectarean rasa, Rādhā is the
flower-bud of all good fortune, Rādhā is the foremost
gopī of Vraja—I worship that Rādhājī.



rādhā padmānanā padmā padmodbhava-supūjitā

padme vivecitā rādhā rādhaivārādhyate mayā (7)

Because Rādhā’s face is like a spotless lotus flower,
She is known as Padma. She is worshiped by Brahmā who
appeared on the lotus emanating from Viṣṇu’s navel, and
when She was first discovered by Her father, She was
resting upon a lotus—I worship that Rādhājī.



rādhā-kṛṣṇātmikā nityaṁ kṛṣṇo rādhātmako dhruvam

vṛndāvaneśvarī rādhā rādhaivārādhyate mayā (8)

Rādhā is eternally immersed in Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is
certainly always immersed in Rādhā, and Rādhā is the
queen of Vṛndāvana—I worship that Rādhājī.



jihvāgre rādhikā-nāma netrāgre rādhikā-tanuḥ

karṇe ca rādhikā-kīrtir mānase rādhikā sadā (9)

Rādhā’s name is on the tip of my tongue, Rādhā’s
beautiful form is always before my eyes, descriptions of
Rādhā’s fame are always in my ears, and Rādhā always
resides in my mind.



kṛṣṇena paṭhitaṁ stotraṁ rādhikā-prītaye param

yaḥ paṭhet prayato nityaṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇāntigo bhavet (10)

Whoever regularly recites with great care this prayer
spoken by Śrī Kṛṣṇa will attain loving service for the
feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.



ārādhita-manāḥ kṛṣṇo rādhārādhita-mānasaḥ

kṛṣṇākṛṣta-manā rādhā rādhā-kṛṣṇeti yaḥ paṭhet (11)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā worships Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Her heart and
mind, and Kṛṣṇa worships Śrīmatī Rādhikā in His heart
and mind; Śrī Kṛṣṇa attracts Rādhikā’s heart and mind,
and Rādhikā attracts Kṛṣṇa’s heart and mind. Whoever
lovingly recites this prayer will become similarly
attracted to the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.


                          288
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017




Śrī Yugala-Kiśorāṣṭakam

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



nava-jaladhara-vidyud-dyota-varnau prasannau

vadana-nayana-padmau cāru-candrāvataṁsau

alaka-tilaka-bhālau keśa-veśa-praphullau

bhaja bhaja tu mano re rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau (1)

O mind, time and again worship the youthful lovers Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who together appear like lightning flashing
from a fresh monsoon cloud, whose lovely lotus faces
always beam contented happiness and are adorned with
lotus eyes, who wear brilliant moon-shaped crowns, whose
foreheads, decorated with charming sandalpaste tilaka,
are rendered more beautiful being surrounded by Their
glistening curly locks of hair, and whose entire
appearance is completely dazzling.



vasana-harita-nīlau candanālepanāṅgau

maṇi-marakata dīptau svarṇa-mālā-prayuktau

kanaka-valaya-hastau rāsa-nāṭya prasaktau

bhaja bhaja tu mano re rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau (2)

O mind, time and again worship the youthful lovers Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā wearing blue cloth and Kṛṣṇa dressed
in yellow. Their bodies are fully decorated with
candana, Rādhā’s glistening like a golden jewel and
Kṛṣṇa’s like a sapphire. They wear golden necklaces and
bracelets. Their hearts are lovingly immersed in the
rāsa dance.



ati-matihara-veśau raṅga-bhaṅgī-tri-bhaṅgau

madhura-mṛdula-hāsyau kuṇḍalākīrṇa-karṇau

naṭavara-vara-ramyau nṛtya-gītānuraktau

bhaja bhaja tu mano re rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau (3)

O mind, always be immersed in worshiping the youthful
lovers Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Candra, whose charming dresses
steal devotees’ minds; who display elegant three-fold
bending poses; who smile mildly and sweetly; whose ears
are adorned with shining, beautiful earrings; who are
the very best of jokesters; who are the best of actors
always wearing gorgeous costumes; and who are always
attracting each other, Kṛṣṇa by playing the flute and

                          289
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

Rādhā by Her dancing.



vividha-guṇa-vidagdhau vandanīyau suveśau

maṇimaya-makarādyaiḥ śobhitāṅgau sphurantau

smita-namita-kaṭākṣau dharma-karma-pradattau

bhaja bhaja tu mano re rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau (4)

O mind, always remain alert to worship the youthful
lovers Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Candra, who possess innumerable
exalted qualities and who are extremely clever and
skillful in tasting rasa in Their loving affairs; who
are worshiped by demigods and sages as well as ordinary
humans; who are decorated with beautiful attire, fish-
shaped earrings studded with brilliant jewels and other
ornaments; whose enchanting, gentle smiles are
accompanied by sidelong glances; and who bestow the
dharma and karma of prema-sevā upon Their devotees (or
who remove all Their devotees’ material attachments,
including their dharma and karma).



kanaka-mukuṭa-cūḍau puṣpitodbhūṣitāṅgau

sakala-vana-niviṣṭau sundarānanda-puñjau

caraṇa-kamala-divyau deva-devādi-sevyau

bhaja bhaja tu mano re rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau (5)

O mind, time and again I implore you to remain alert to
worship the youthful lovers Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Candra, who
wear golden crowns upon Their heads, whose bodies are
decorated with many colored flowers, who wander through
all the forests of Vṛndāvana enjoying pastimes, who are
the embodiment of condensed ānanda, and whose miraculous
lotus feet are served by all devatās and devīs.



ati-suvalita-gātrau gandha-mālyair virājau

kati kati ramaṇīnāṁ sevyamānau suveśau

muni-sura-gaṇa-bhāvyau veda-śāstrādi-vijñau

bhaja bhaja tu mano re rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau (6)

O mind, always worship the youthful lovers Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, whose very, very soft bodies are adorned with
fragrant flower garlands, whose charmingly dressed forms
are served by uncountable numbers of beautiful Vraja
sundarīs, who are beautifully dressed, and who are
conversant with all the Vedas which are contemplated in
trance by the sages and demigods.



ati-sumadhura-mūrtau duṣṭa-darpa-praśāntau

                          290
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


sura-vara-vara-dau dvau sarva-siddhi-pradānau

ati-rasa-vaśa-magnau gīta-vādyair vitānau

bhaja bhaja tu mano re rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau (7)

O mind, I implore you time and again to always remain
immersed in worshiping the youthful lovers Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, whose forms are the embodiment of the sweetest
sweetness, who pulverise the pride of wicked and
arrogant persons, who bestow benedictions upon the best
of the demigods including Mahādeva Śiva, who bestow all
varieties of perfections, who are thoroughly engrossed
in tasting the nectar of transcendental bliss (ānanda-
cinmaya-rasa), and who are masters in the arts of
singing, dancing, and playing musical instruments.



agama-nigama-sārau sṛṣṭi-saṁhāra-kārau

vayasi nava-kiśorau nitya-vṛndāvana-sthau

śamana-bhaya-vināśau pāpinas tārayantau

bhaja bhaja tu mano re rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau (8)

O mind, remain forever immersed in worshiping the
youthful lovers Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Candra, whose svarūpa is
the essence of the Vedas; who through the agency of
Their expansions perform the creation, maintenance, and
destruction of the material universes; who are ever-
fresh youths almost touching adolescence; who are
eternally situated at the yoga-pīṭha in Vṛndāvana; and
who deliver the sinful.



idaṁ manoharaṁ stotraṁ śraddhayā yaḥ paṭhen naraḥ

rādhikā-kṛṣṇacandrau ca siddhi-dau nātra saṁśayaḥ (9)

Sādhakas who faithfully recite this supremely charming
Yugala-kiśorāṣṭakam will surely obtain the perfection of
rendering direct service to the lotus feet of the
bestowers of all perfections, the youthful lovers Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa—of this there is no doubt.




Śrī Rādhā Vinoda-Bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam

(Why Śrī Kṛṣṇa acquired a bright complexion)

Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja



rādhā-cintā-niveśena yasya kāntir vilopitā

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇaṁ vande rādhāliṅgita-vigraham (1)

                          291
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


I worship the lotus feet of that form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa when,
due to being thoroughly immersed in separation from
Śrīmatī Rādhikā (who is displaying māna, Her mood of
jealous anger), His own dark complexion vanishes and He
assumes Her bright, golden luster; or, I worship the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as He is embraced by Śrīmatī
Rādhikā (after Her māna has broken).



sevya-sevaka-sambhoge dvayor bhedaḥ kuto bhavet

vipralambhe tu sarvasya bhedaḥ sadā vivarddhate (2)

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa (sevya—who always takes service from
sevaka*) and Śrīmatī Rādhikā (sevaka—who is always doing
sevā to sevya) meet together and enjoy each other, how
can there be any distinction between Them? But in
vipralambha Their feelings of separateness perpetually
intensify. [*Sevya is bhoktā Bhagavān—who is always
enjoying. Sevaka is bhogya—who is enjoyed. At time of
meeting there is no bheda, difference, between Them—They
are abheda, non-different whereas in separation Their
mood of difference especially increases.]



cil-līlā-mithunaṁ tattvaṁ bhedābhedam acintyakam

śakti-śaktimator aikyaṁ yugapad varttate sadā (3)

By the influence of acintya-śakti, the Divine Couple,
śakti (potency) and śaktimān (the possessor of potency)
who perform unlimited transcendental pastimes, are
forever simultaneously different and non-different.
[Para-tattva is never without śakti. When śakti-śaktimān
are one svarūpa, in one body, then Gaura-tattva is
manifest, and when They are separate in two bodies,
Kṛṣṇa as lilā-purusottama enjoys līlā with Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.]

tattvam ekaṁ paraṁ vidyāt līlayā tad dvidhā sthitam

gauraḥ kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ hy etad ubhāv ubhayam āpnutaḥ (4)

Although the Supreme Truth is one, His pastimes appear
in two forms: those of Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa and Śrī
Gaurasundara, both of whom are directly Svayaṁ Bhagavān
(and whose contradictory qualities are fully harmonized
by acintya-śakti).

[The usage of the word varṇa (complexion) in verse 5 and
the word guṇa (quality) in verse 6 establishes Śrī
Gaura-tattva to be as worshipable as Śrī Kṛṣṇa-tattva:]



sarve varṇāḥ yatrāviṣṭāḥ gaura-kāntir vikāśate

sarva-varṇena hīnas tu kṛṣṇa-varṇaḥ prakāśate (5)

Wherever all the colours are combined, a golden hue
(Gaura-kānti) is manifest; for example, although all

                          292
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

colours are present in the sun, its hue is golden. On
the other hand, in the absence of all colour, black
(Śyāma-kānti) is manifest (and according to the opinion
of modern scientists, black is actually devoid of
colour).



saguṇaṁ nirguṇaṁ tattvam ekam evādvitīyakam

sarva-nitya-guṇair gauraḥ kṛṣṇau rasas tu nirguṇaiḥ (6)

There is no difference between the supreme truth
manifest as saguṇa (possessed of transcendental
attributes—Gaura-kānti) and nirguṇa (devoid of material
attributes—Śyāma-kānti). They are one and the same. Śrī
Gaurasundara possesses all eternal divine qualities and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the embodiment of rasa which is completely
devoid of mundane qualities.



śrī-kṛṣṇaṁ mithunaṁ brahma tyaktvā tu nirguṇaṁ hi tat

upāsate mṛṣā vijñāḥ yathā tuṣāvaghātinaḥ (7)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaurāṅga are both the supreme brahma.
Those who abandon serving Them to worship the formless
brahma never attain factual liberation and are precisely
like those who try to extract rice by beating empty
husks—all they obtain is their fruitless, hard labor.



śrī-vinoda-bihārī yo rādhayā milito yadā

tadāhaṁ vandanaṁ kuryāṁ sarasvatī-prasādataḥ (8)

By the mercy of my Gurudeva Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda,
I worship Śrī Vinoda-bihārī and Śrīmatī Rādhikā as They
meet and take Their darśana at that time.



iti tattvāṣṭakaṁ nityaṁ yaḥ paṭhet śraddhayānvitaḥ

kṛṣṇa-tattvam abhijñāya gaura-pade bhaven matiḥ (9)

Whoever daily recites this aṣṭakam with great faith will
fully comprehend Kṛṣṇa-tattva and become immersed in
meditation upon the lotus feet of Śrī Gaurasundara.




Śrī Rādhā-Kuṇḍāṣṭakam

Śrīmad Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī



vṛṣabha-danuja-nāśān narma-dharmokti-raṅgair


                          293
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

nikhila-nija-sakhībhir yat sva-hastena pūrṇam

prakaṭitam api vṛndāraṇya-rājñyā pramodais

tad ati-surabhi-rādhā-kuṇḍam evāśrayo me (1)

After the killing of Ariṣṭāsura, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her
sakhīs exchanged many joking words with Śrī Kṛṣṇa
concerning the necessary atonement for one who has
committed the offence of killing a bull. As a result,
the Queen of Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and Her sakhīs
joyfully excavated and filled Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa with their
own hands. May that immensely fragrant Rādhā-kuṇḍa be my
shelter.



vraja-bhuvi mura-śatroḥ preyasīnāṁ nikāmair

asulabham api tūrṇaṁ prema-kalpa-drumaṁ tam

janayati hṛdi bhūmau snātur uccaiḥ priyaṁ yat

tad ati-surabhi-rādhā-kuṇḍam evāśrayo me (2)

In the land of the hearts of those who bathe in Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, a desire tree of the superlative prema, which is
not attainable even for Kṛṣṇa’s principal queens in
Dvārakā, will arise. May that supremely charming Rādhā-
kuṇḍa be my shelter.



agha-ripur api yatnād atra devyāḥ prasāda-

prasara-kṛta-kaṭākṣa-prāpti-kāmaḥ prakāmam

anusarati yad uccaiḥ snāna-sevānu-bandhais

tad ati-surabhi-rādhā-kuṇḍam evāśrayo me (3)

For the pleasure of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, even Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself, yearning to attain Her merciful sidelong
glance, regularly bathes in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, carefully
observing all the appropriate rituals. May that
supremely enchanting Rādhā-kuṇḍa be my shelter.



vraja-bhuvana-sudhāṁśoḥ prema-bhūmir nikāmaṁ

vraja-madhura-kiśorī-mauli-ratna-priyeva

paricitam api nāmnā yac ca tenaiva tasyās

tad ati-surabhi-rādhā-kuṇḍam evāśrayo me (4)

May that supremely enchanting Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which the
moon of Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, loves as much as He loves the
crown-jewel amongst the sweet girls of Vraja, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and which He has made known by the name of
Rādhikā Herself, be my shelter.



                          294
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


api jana iha kaścid yasya sevā-prasādaiḥ

praṇaya-sura-latā syāt tasya goṣṭhendra-sūnoḥ

sapadi kila mad-īśā-dāsya-puṣpa-praśasyā

tad ati-surabhi-rādhā-kuṇḍam evāśrayo me (5)

The mercy obtained by serving Rādhā-kuṇḍa makes the
desire-creeper of prema for the prince of Vraja sprout
and is celebrated for bearing the flower of service to
my svāminī Śrīmatī Rādhikā. May that supremely charming
Rādhā-kuṇḍa be my shelter.



taṭa-madhura-nikuñjāḥ klṛpta-nāmāna uccair

nija-parijana-vargaiḥ saṁvibhajyāśritās taiḥ

madhukara-ruta-ramyā yasya rājanti kāmyās

tad ati-surabhi-rādhā-kuṇḍam evāśrayo me (6)

Gloriously manifest on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa are
eight kuñjas named after Rādhikā’s principal sakhīs.*
Filled with the sweet humming of bumblebees, these
kuñjas act as stimuli for the amorous pastimes of the
Divine Couple. The lotus feet of that Rādhikā, who sends
Kṛṣṇa to enjoy in all the different kuñjas, are desired
by everyone. May that supremely enchanting Rādhā-kuṇḍa
be the shelter of my life.

*(On the eastern bank is the kuñja known as Citrā-
sukhada, on the southeastern side is Indulekhā-sukhada,
on the southern bank is Campakalatā-sukhada, on the
southwestern side is Raṅgadevī-sukhada, on the western
bank is Tuṅgavidyā-sukhada, on the northwestern side is
Sudevī-sukhada, on the northern bank is Lalitā-sukhada,
and on the northeastern side is the kuñja known as
Viśākhā-sukhada.)



taṭa-bhuvi vara-vedyāṁ yasya narmāti-hṛdyāṁ

madhura-madhura-vārtāṁ goṣṭha-candrasya bhaṅgyā

prathayati mitha īśā prāṇa-sakhyālibhiḥ sā

tad ati-surabhi-rādhā-kuṇḍam evāśrayo me (7)

Situated on an exquisite dais on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa
and accompanied by Her beloved sakhīs, our svāminī
Śrīmatī Rādhikā charmingly engages in sweet, joking
words with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the moon of Vraja. These playful
verbal exchanges are enhanced by the suggestion of so
many innuendoes. May that Rādhā-kuṇḍa be the shelter of
my life.



anudinam ati-raṅgaiḥ prema-mattāli-saṅghair

                          295
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


vara-sarasija-gandhair hāri-vāri-prapūrṇe

viharata iha yasmin dam-patī tau pramattau

tad ati-surabhi-rādhā-kuṇḍam evāśrayo me (8)

May that very charming and especially fragrant Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, where intoxicated with love the Divine Couple and
the sakhīs daily cavort with great joy in the water so
fragrant with exquisite lotus flowers, be the sole
shelter of my life.



avikalam ati devyāś cāru kuṇḍāṣṭakaṁ yaḥ

paripaṭhati tadīyollāsi-dāsyārpitātmā

aciram iha śarīre darśayaty eva tasmai

madhu-ripur ati-modaiḥ śliṣyamāṇāṁ priyāṁ tām (9)

To that devotee who, in a resolute mood of aspiring to
serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā, reads this charming prayer
describing Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, even in their present body
Śrī Kṛṣṇa will quickly grant them darśana of not only
His beloved Rādhikā, but also of Their many variegated
amorous pastimes. Witnessing these pastimes and
envisioning himself serving Yugala-kiśora in various
ways, such a devotee will feel immense jubilation. (This
aṣṭaka is recited in the poetic meter known as
‘Mālinī’.)




Śrī Śyāma-Kuṇḍāṣṭakam

Śrīmad Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī



vṛṣabha-danuja-nāśānantaraṁ yat sva-goṣṭhīm

ayasi vṛṣabha-śatro mā spṛśa tvaṁ vadantyām

iti vṛṣa-ravi-putryāṁ kṛṣṇa-pārṣṇiṁ prakhātaṁ

tad ati-vimala-nīraṁ śyāma-kuṇḍaṁ gatir me (1)

After Kṛṣṇa killed Vṛṣabhāsura, Śrīmatī Rādhikā said to
Him, “O Vṛṣabha-śatru! You are approaching us, but don’t
touch us!” Hearing these words, with a single blow from
His heel Kṛṣṇa manifested Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa. May that
Śyāma-kuṇḍa, composed of exceptionally pure water, be my
shelter.



tri-jagati nivasad yat tīrtha-vṛndaṁ tamoghnaṁ

vraja-nṛpati-kumāreṇāhṛtaṁ tat samagram

                          296
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


svayam idam avagāḍhaṁ yan mahimnaḥ prakāśaṁ

tad ati-vimala-nīraṁ śyāma-kuṇḍaṁ gatir me (2)

Having been called there by Śrī Kṛṣṇa, all the sin-
vanquishing holy places within the three worlds began
residing together within Śyāma-kuṇḍa, thereby
broadcasting the extensive glories of that place. May
that Śyāma-kuṇḍa, composed of exceptionally pure water,
be my shelter.



yad ati-vimala-nīre tīrtha-rūpe praśaste

tvam api kuru kṛśāṅgi! snānam atraiva rādhe

iti vinaya-vacobhiḥ prārthanā-kṛt sa kṛṣṇas

tad ati-vimala-nīraṁ śyāma-kuṇḍaṁ gatir me (3)

«He Kṛśāṅgi Rādhe! You please also bathe in the pristine
waters of this purifying pond which is now a beautiful
holy place”—with these words Śrī Kṛṣṇa implored even
Śrīmatī Rādhikā to bathe in Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa. May that
Śyāma-kuṇḍa, composed of exceptionally pure water, be my
shelter.



vṛṣabha-danuja-nāśād uttha-pāpaṁ samāptaṁ

dyumaṇi-sakha-jayoccair varjayitveti tīrthaṁ

nijam akhila-sakhībhiḥ kuṇḍam eva prakāśyaṁ

tad ati-vimala-nīraṁ śyāma-kuṇḍaṁ gatir me (4)

Seeing how Kṛṣṇa’s ‘sin’ of killing Vṛṣabhāsura was
absolved by His bathing in this pond which is inhabited
by all the holy places and which was manifest from a
single blow of His heel, Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, accompanied by all Her sakhīs, manifested a
similar pond nearby. Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa, composed of
exceptionally pure water, is my shelter.



yad ati sakala-tīrthais tyakta-vākyaiḥ prabhītaiḥ

sa-vinayam abhiyuktaiḥ kṛṣṇacandre nivedya

agatika-gati-rādhā varjanān no gatiḥ kā

tad ati-vimala-nīraṁ śyāma-kuṇḍaṁ gatir me (5)

After being forbidden by Śrīmatī Rādhikā to enter Her
pond, the personified holy places became very fearful
and humbly prostrating themselves at Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra’s
lotus feet, said, “Having been rejected by Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, the sole shelter for the shelterless, what will
be our destination?” May the pure waters of Śrī Śyāma-
kuṇda, the place where this entreaty was spoken, be my

                          297
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

shelter.



yad ati-vikala-tīrthaṁ kṛṣṇacandraṁ prasusthaṁ

ati-laghu-nati-vākyaiḥ suprasanneti rādhā

vividha-caṭula-vākyaiḥ prārthanāḍhyā bhavantī

tad ati-vimala-nīraṁ śyāma-kuṇḍaṁ gatir me (6)

Upon seeing the distress of the personified holy places
and desiring to bestow upon them the qualification to
enter Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s pond, Śrī Kṛṣṇa displayed
various bodily poses and facial expressions and appealed
to Rādhikā with clever words. Then, very softly and
courteously, Rādhikā replied that She was very pleased—
may the pure waters of that Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa, where these
words were spoken, be my shelter.



yad ati-lalita-pādais tāṁ prasādyāpta-tair thyais

tad atiśaya-kṛpārdraiḥ saṅgamena praviṣṭaiḥ

vraja-nava-yuva-rādhā-kuṇḍam eva prapannaṁ

tad ati-vimala-nīraṁ śyāma-kuṇḍaṁ gatir me (7)

Then those holy places, which had assumed the form of
water and entered Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa, pleased Śrīmatī
Rādhikā with verses of exceptionally brilliant poetry
and, upon attaining Her mercy, penetrated the land
between the two kuṇḍas and entered the pond of the ever-
fresh Youthful Lovers of Vraja, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Śyāma-
kuṇḍa, composed of exceptionally pure water, is my sole
shelter.



yad ati-nikaṭa-tīre klapta-kuñjaṁ suramyaṁ

subala-baṭu-mukhebhyo rādhikādyaiḥ pradattam

vividha-kusuma-vallī-kalpa-vṛkṣādi-rājaṁ

tad ati-vimala-nīraṁ śyāma-kuṇḍaṁ gatir me (8)

On the banks of Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her
sakhīs created kuñjas beautified by desire trees and
burgeoning vines with varieties of flowers and then
awarded those kuñjas to Subala, Madhumaṅgala, and the
other primary sakhās. That Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa, composed of
exceptionally pure water, is my shelter.



paripaṭhati sumedhāḥ śyāma-kuṇḍāṣṭakaṁ yo

nava-jaladhara-rūpe svarṇa-kāntyāṁ ca rāgāt

vraja-narapati-putras tasya labhyaḥ suśīghraṁ

                          298
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017


saha sa-gaṇa-sakhībhī rādhayā syāt subhajyaḥ (9)

That intelligent person who regularly recites this
Śyāma-kuṇḍāṣṭakam with great devotion will develop
loving attraction for Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose
complexion is like that of a fresh monsoon cloud and who
is accompanied by Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose complexion is
like pure gold and who is always surrounded by Her
sakhīs, thereby easily entering into Their worship and
attaining Their eternal company very soon.




Śrī Govardhana-Vāsa-Prārthanā-Daśakam

Śrīmad Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī



nija-pati-bhuja-daṇḍa-cchatra-bhāvaṁ prapadya

prati-hata-mada-dhṛṣṭod-daṇḍa-devendra-garva

atula-pṛthula-śaila-śreṇi-bhūpa! priyaṁ me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam (1)

O beautiful Govardhana, matchlessly enormous king of
mountains! Please bestow upon me my most cherished
desire—residence near your side. You took the shape of
an umbrella with the arm of your own Lord as the handle,
thus pulverizing the arrogant pride of Indra who was
intoxicated by his own opulence.



pramada-madana-līlāḥ kandare kandare te

racayati nava-yūnor dvandvam asminn amandam

iti kila kalanārthaṁ lagnakas tad-dvayor me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam (2)

O Govardhana! Please grant me a dwelling near your side
so that I can easily witness and serve the youthful
lovers Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa as They perform newer and newer
secret, amorous līlās within your many caves where They
become completely maddened from drinking prema. You are
present and making everything possible.



anupama-maṇi-vedī-ratna-siṁhāsanorvī-

ruhajhara-darasānudroṇi-saṅgheṣu raṅgaiḥ

saha bala-sakhibhiḥ saṅkhelayan sva-priyaṁ me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam (3)


                          299
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

O Govardhana! Please grant me a dwelling near your side
for you are very dear to me. If you say to me, “Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa also perform pastimes at Saṅketa and at
other places in the forests, so why don’t you desire to
reside there?” I will reply that upon your incomparable
pearl-studded altars, on your jewelled siṁhāsanas, below
your trees, in your cracks and crevices, upon your
crest, and in your multitude of caves, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva always enjoy playful sports accompanied by
Śrīdāma and the other sakhās.



rasa-nidhi-nava-yūnoḥ sākṣiṇīṁ dāna-keler

dyuti-parimala-viddhāṁ śyāma-vedīṁ prakāśya

rasika-vara-kulānāṁ modam āsphālayan me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam (4)

O Govardhana! Please grant me residence near your side
because, having manifested a lustrous black vedī (raised
sitting place) with an enchanting scent, you facilitated
and witnessed the dāna-keli pastime enacted by the
youthful lovers Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who Themselves are a
treasure-house of delicious rasa-mellows. Thus you
increase the transcendental pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
exalted rasika devotees who relish those mellows.



hari-dayitam apūrvaṁ rādhikā-kuṇḍam ātma-

priya-sakham iha kaṇṭhe narmaṇāliṅgya guptaḥ

nava-yuva-yuga-khelās tatra paśyan raho me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam (5)

O Govardhana! Please grant me residence near your side.
The unprecedented Rādhā-kuṇḍa is most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and also your dear friend. Embracing Rādhā-kuṇḍa to your
neck in a playful mood, you remain hidden there while
watching Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa enjoy pastimes in Their freshly
blossoming youth. That secluded spot is also perfectly
suitable for me—I will sit right there and relish Their
pastimes with you.



sthala-jala-tala-śaṣpair bhūruhac-chāyayā ca

prati-padam anukālaṁ hanta saṁvardhayan gāḥ

tri-jagati nija-gotraṁ sārthakaṁ khyāpayan me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam (6)

O Govardhana! Please grant me residence near your side.
You are worshiping Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa with your nice
spacious meadows, ponds, streams and waterfalls,
forests, fresh grass, and shade-trees, and you are
nourishing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved cows whose numbers are

                          300
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

thus increasing at every moment. Your very name
‘Govardhana’ (gāḥ means cows, and vardhayati means to
nourish and increase) is successful and renowned
throughout the three worlds. If I can reside near you, I
will also be able to receive the darśana of my iṣṭadeva
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who comes to you when He brings His cows out
to graze.



sura-pati-kṛta-dīrgha-drohato goṣṭha-rakṣāṁ

tava nava-gṛha-rūpasyāntare kurvataiva

agha-baka-ripuṇoccair dattamāna! drutaṁ me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam (7)

O Govardhana! Please bestow upon me residence by your
side right away. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the slayer of Aghāsura and
Bakāsura, showed you special honour by establishing
Vraja beneath you while holding you aloft, thereby
turning you into a new home for the Vrajavāsīs and
protecting them from Indra’s hostility. You are the
crown of Vṛndāvana and Kṛṣṇa always takes care of you
since you are His dear devotee. Kṛṣṇa’s nature is that
He is merciful to those who, although unqualified,
reside near those whom He honours, so by residing near
you I also will certainly obtain Kṛṣṇa’s mercy.



giri-nṛpa! haridāsa-śreṇī-varyeti nāmā-

mṛtam idam uditaṁ śrī-rādhikā-vaktra-candrāt

vraja-nava-tilakatve klṛpta! vedaiḥ sphuṭaṁ me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam (8)

O Girirāja Mahārāja! From the moon-like face of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā the following words have issued: “This hill is
the best of those who are known as Haridāsa.” These
words from the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.18) have
revealed the nectar of your name, and all the Vedas have
established you as the fresh tilaka of Vraja-maṇḍala.
You are such a high-class devotee, so if I stay with
you, I will certainly get high-class bhakti. Therefore,
the most desirable place to reside is near your side;
please grant me a dwelling there.



nija-jana-yuta-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-maitrī-rasākta-

vraja-nara-paśu-pakṣi-vrāta-saukhyaika-dātaḥ

agaṇita-karuṇatvān mām urī-kṛtya tāntaṁ

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam (9)

O Govardhana! You are absorbed in the rasa of friendship
towards Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa who are surrounded by Their
sakhīs and sakhās, and you are the unparalleled source

                          301
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

of happiness for the men, women, birds, animals, and all
the living entities of Vraja. You are so kind. Kṛṣṇa
just touched you and automatically you lifted yourself
up to serve Him, becoming weightless on His finger. You
fulfill Kṛṣṇa’s desires and protect all Vrajavāsīs, so
please accept this most fallen and miserable person and
by mercifully bestowing upon me residence near your
side, make even poor me a worthy recipient of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s love.



nirupadhi-karuṇena śrī-śacī-nandanena

tvayi kapaṭi-śaṭho ’pi tvat-priyeṇārpito ’smi

iti khalu mama yogyāyogyatāṁ tām agṛhṇan

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana! tvam (10)

O Govardhana! Although I am a cheater and a rogue, the
greatly merciful Śrī Śacīnandana Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, who is
most dear to you, has offered me unto you (so you are
therefore obliged to accept me). Without considering
whether I am qualified or unqualified, please bestow
upon me a residence near your side.



rasada-daśakam asya śrīla-govardhanasya

kṣiti-dhara-kula-bhartur yaḥ prayatnād adhīte

sa sapadi sukha-de ’smin vāsam āsādya sākṣāc-

chubha-da-yugala-sevā-ratnam āpnoti tūrṇam (11)

Whoever ardently meditates on these ten nectarean verses
glorifying Śrīla Govardhana, the master of mountains,
will obtain blissful residence near Govardhana, thereby
very quickly attaining the auspicious jewel of direct
service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. (This composition is recited
in the poetic meter known as ‘Mālinī’.)




Śrī Govardhanāṣṭakam

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura



kṛṣṇa-prasādena samasta-śaila-

sāmrājyam āpnoti ca vairiṇo ’pi

śakrasya yaḥ prāpa baliṁ sa sākṣād

govardhano me diśatām abhīṣṭam (1)

May Govardhana Hill fulfill my deepest desire—to get
darśana of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s līlās. By Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s

                          302
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

mercy Govardhana became the emperor of all mountains,
and received the offerings meant for Indra despite
Indra’s enmity.



sva-preṣṭha-hastāmbuja-saukumārya-

sukhānubhūter ati-bhūmi vṛtteḥ

mahendra-vajrāhatim apy ajānan

govardhano me diṣatām abhīṣṭam (2)

Feeling the softness of his dearmost Kṛṣṇa’s lotus hand
when he was being held aloft by Him filled him with so
much ānanda that he did not even notice Indra’s
thunderbolts striking his body. May that Govardhana
fulfill my desire.



yatraiva kṛṣṇo vṛṣabhānu-putryā

dānaṁ gṛhītuṁ kalahaṁ vitene

śruteḥ spṛhā yatra mahaty ataḥ śrī-

govardhano me diṣatām abhiṣṭam (3)

Demanding a road tax, Kṛṣṇa quarreled for several hours
at Dān Ghāṭī with the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahāraja.
Rasika-bhaktas visiting Govardhana are eager to listen
to that sweet prema quarrel. May that Govardhana fulfill
my desire that I also can hear that verbal battle.



snātvā saraḥ svaśu samīra-hastī

yatraiva nīpādi-parāga-dhūliḥ

ālolayan khelati cāru sa śrī-

govardhano me diṣatām abhīṣṭam (4)

Bathing in Govardhana’s lakes which are filled with
lotuses and surrounded by kadamba and other flowers, the
cool, sweet and strong breeze blows over the water,
shaking the pollen from the flowers as it blows the
flowers against each other. This breeze, mixing
playfully with the pollen and fragrance of the flowers,
is like an elephant who covers himself with dust after
taking his bath and then plays with his female friends.
May that beautiful Govardhana fulfill my desire.



kastūrikābhiḥ śayitaṁ kim atrety

ūhaṁ prabhoḥ svasya muhur vitanvan

naisargika-svīya-śilā-sugandhair


                          303
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

govardhano me diṣatām abhīṣṭam (5)

Is the sweet fragrance of Govardhana coming because
Kṛṣṇa is sleeping on a bed of musk here? If Kṛṣṇa is not
sleeping here, how is this fragrance coming? All of
Govardhana’s śilās are fragrant because the breeze is
carrying the fragrance and pollen of the flowers and the
fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s līlās here with all the gopīs. May
that Govardhana fulfill my desire.



vaṁśa-pratidhvany-anusāra-vartma

didṛkṣavo yatra hariṁ hariṇyaḥ

yāntyo labhante na hi vismitāḥ sa

govardhano me diṣatām abhīṣṭam (6)

The deer on Govardhana start running upon hearing the
sound of the wind blowing through the holes of all the
bamboo trees, thinking that Kṛṣṇa is there playing His
flute. Not finding Him, they are astonished and wander
here and there searching for Him. May that Govardhana
fulfill my desire.



yatraiva gaṅgām anu nāvi rādhām

ārohya madhye tu nimagna-naukaḥ

kṛṣṇo hi rādhānugalo babhau sa

govardhano me diṣatām abhīṣṭam (7)

In the middle of Mānasī Gaṅgā, Śrī Rādhā was sitting in
Kṛṣṇa’s boat. When the boat began to sink, She tightly
clung to His neck. Together They looked very beautiful.
May that Govardhana (who provides the setting for this
secret līlā) fulfill my desire.



vinā bhavet kiṁ hari-dāsa-varya-

padāśrayaṁ bhaktir ataḥ śrayāmi

yam eva saprema nijeśayoḥ śrī-

govardhano me diṣatām abhīṣṭam (8)

Without taking shelter of the lotus feet of Govardhana,
who is the best of Śrī Hari’s servants and who is full
of love for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, how will one ever attain
śuddha bhakti? May that Govardhana fulfill my inner
desire and grant me special prema-sevā for Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa when They are meeting in his many kuñjas.



etat paṭhed yo hari-dāsa-varya-


                          304
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

mahānubhāvāṣṭakam ārdra-cetāḥ

śrī-rādhikā-mādhavayoḥ padābja-

dāsyaṁ sa vinded acireṇa sākṣāt (9)

May that person who reads these eight verses glorifying
Śrī Hari’s greatest servant, with his heart melting, his
voice choking, his hairs standing on end and tears
flowing, quickly attain direct service to the lotus feet
of Śrī Rādhikā-Mādhava. Govardhana is feeling so many
bhāvas as he’s watching Their līlās and‚ being very
kind, he can easily give this prema.



Śrī Vṛndāvanāṣṭakam

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura



na yoga-siddhir na mamāstu mokṣo

vaikuṇṭha-loke ’pi na pārṣadatvam

premāpi na syād iti cettarāṁ tu

mamāstu vṛndāvana eva vāsaḥ (1)

I do not want to achieve mystic powers, impersonal
liberation, residence in Vaikuṇṭha as an eternal
associate of Nārāyana, nor do I want vaikunṭha-prema. I
only want to live in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, because there
I can easily attain the service of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala, especially the service of my most worshipable
arādhya-devī Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



tārṇaṁ janur yatra vidhir yayāce

sad-bhakta-cūḍāmaṇir uddhavo ’pi

vīkṣyaiva mādhurya-dhūrāṁ tad asmin

mamāstu vṛndāvana eva vāsaḥ (2)

Upon seeing the profuse sweetness of Śrī Vṛndāvana, even
Brahmā, the spiritual master of the entire universe, and
Uddhava, the crown-jewel of exalted devotees, prayed to
take birth there as blades of grass. May Śrī Vṛndāvana
always be my residence.



kiṁ te kṛtaṁ hanta tapaḥ kṣitīti

gopyo ’pi bhūme stuvate sma kīrtim

yenaiva kṛṣṇāṅghri-padāṅkite ’smin

mamāstu vṛndāvana eva vāsaḥ (3)


                          305
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa vanished from the rāsa-līlā, the gopīs
prayed (SB 10.30.10), “kiṁ te kṛtaṁ kṣiti tapo... O
Pṛthivī-devī! What unprecedented austerities did you
perform to receive the touch of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s feet upon
your surface in Vṛndāvana? Feeling romañca
(horripilation), your grasses are standing upright!” May
I always reside in Śrī Vṛndāvana, which is marked with
Kṛṣṇa’s footprints.



gopāṅganā-lampaṭataiva yatra

yasyāṁ rasaḥ pūrṇatamatvam āpa

yato raso vai sa iti śrutis tan

mamāstu vṛndāvana eva vāsaḥ (4)

Vṛndāvana is that place where the loving attachment of
the gopīs is predominant, and within that loving
attachment, rasa reaches its pinnacle. The śrutis
declare: “raso vai saḥ—without question Rasika-śekhara
Śrī Nanda-nandana is the embodiment of rasa.” For this
reason I want to live in Śrī Vṛndāvana.



bhānḍīra-govardhana-rāsa-pīṭhais

tri-sūmake yojana-pañcakena

mite vibhutvād amite ’pi cāsmin

mamāstu vṛndāvana eva vāsaḥ (5)

Although Śrī Vṛndāvana is limitless, due to the presence
of Bhāṇḍīravaṭa, Govardhana, and the rāsa-pīṭha (where
rāsa-līlā took place), it is known to have three
borders, and to be five yojanas in diameter. May I
always reside in Śrī Vṛndāvana.



yatrādhipatyaṁ vṛṣabhānu-putryā

yenodayet prema-sukhaṁ janānām

yasmin mamāśā balavatyato ’smin

mamāstu vṛndāvana eva vāsaḥ (6)

May I always reside in Śrī Vṛndāvana, who is supremely
glorious with the daughter of Vṛṣabhāṇu Mahārāja as
queen. It is my long-cherished hope to receive the mercy
of that Vṛndāvana, who bestows the happiness of
bhāgavata-prema upon her devotees.



yasmin mahā-rāsa-vilāsa-līlā

na prāpa yāṁ śrīr api sā tapobhiḥ


                          306
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

tatrollasan-mañju-nikuñja-puñje

mamāstu vṛndāvana eva vāsaḥ (7)

The renowned pastime of the rāsa dance, which even
Lakṣmī-devī could not gain entrance into although she
performed varieties of penances, is enacted eternally in
Vṛndāvana, and even today is going on. Therefore may I
always reside in Śrī Vṛndāvana and serve in her
multitudes of splendid, enchanting pleasure-groves.



sadā ruru-nyaṅkumukhā viśaṅkaṁ

khelanti kūjanti pikālikīrāḥ

śikhaṇḍino yatra naṭanti tasmin

mamāstu vṛndāvana eva vāsaḥ (8)

May I always reside in that Śrī Vṛndāvana where
varieties of deer (the black ruru, the nyaṅku with
branching horns) fearlessly play, where cuckoos,
bumblebees, parrots and many other kinds of birds sing,
and where many types of peacocks dance.



vṛndāvanasyāṣṭakam etad uccaiḥ

paṭhanti ye niścala-budhayas te

vṛndāvaneśāṅghri-saroja-sevāṁ

sākṣāl labhante januṣo ’nta eva (9)

Those with a fixed, sober mind who loudly recite this
Vṛndāvanāṣṭakam in a mood of deep meditation will, at
the end of this very life, attain the direct service of
the lotus feet of the king and queen of Śrī Vṛndāvana,
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. (This aṣṭaka is recited in the poetic
meter known as ‘Upajāti’.)




Śrī Vṛndā-Devyaṣṭakam

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura



gāṅgeya-cāmpeya-taḍid-vinindi-

rociḥ-pravāha-snapitātma-vṛnde!

bandhūka-bandhu-dyuti-divya-vāso

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam (1)

O Vṛnde! Your bodily complexion mocks the luster of
gold, campaka flowers, and lightning. Fully devoted to

                          307
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, you shine with the brightness of Their
sevā, which you mercifully shower upon devotees who
worship you. Your splendid red dress shines like the red
bandhūka and bandhu flowers—I offer praṇāma unto your
lotus feet.



bimbādharoditvara-manda-hāsya-

nāsāgra-muktā-dyuti-dīpitāsye

vicitra-ratnābharaṇa-śriyāḍhye!

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam (2)

O Vṛnde! A gentle smile emanates from your red bimba-
fruit-like lips, the luster of the pearl which adorns
the tip of your nose illuminates your entire face, and
your jeweled ornaments further enhance your
extraordinary beauty—I offer praṇāma unto your lotus
feet.



samasta-vaikuṇṭha-śiromaṇau śrī-

kṛṣṇasya vṛndāvana-dhanya-dhāmni

dattādhikāre vṛṣabhānu-putryā

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam (3)

O Vṛnde! The daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, has given you dominion over Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s most
glorious Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, which is the crown-jewel
of all the Vaikuṇṭha planets. I offer praṇāma unto your
lotus feet.



tvad-ājñayā pallava-puṣpa-bhṛṅga

mṛgādibhir mādhava-keli-kuñjāḥ

madhvādibhir bhānti vibhūṣyamāṇā

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam (4)

O Vṛnde! On your order the leaves, flowers, bees, deer,
peacocks, parrots, and all the other living entities in
Vṛndāvana beautifully decorate the wondrous kuñjas where
Śrī Mādhava enjoys His playful loving pastimes (keli-
vilāsa) in the perpetual spring season—I offer praṇāma
unto your lotus feet.



tvadīya-dūtyena nikuñja-yunor

atyutkayoḥ keli-vilāsa-siddhiḥ

tvat-saubhagaṁ kena nirucyatāṁ tad


                          308
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam (5)

O Vṛnde! You send your messengers who cleverly make all
arrangements so that Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa can unite for Their
keli-vilāsa. You yourself also act as messenger,
overcoming difficult obstacles to Their meeting. Because
you are helping in these līlās, Their meetings must be
successful! Who in this world could possibly describe
your peerless good fortune? Therefore, I worship you and
offer praṇāma unto your lotus feet.



rāsābhilāṣo vasatiś ca vṛndā-

vane tvad-īśāṅghri-saroja-sevā

labhyā ca puṁsāṁ kṛpayā tavaiva

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam (6)

O Vṛnde! By your mercy only the devotees attain
residence in Śrī Vṛndāvana, render service to the lotus
feet of your beloved Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava, and directly
enter into the rāsa-līlā—I offer praṇāma unto your lotus
feet.



tvaṁ kīrtyase sātvata-tantra-vidbhir

līlābhidhānā kila kṛṣṇa-śaktiḥ

tavaiva mūrtis tulasī nṛ-loke

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam (7)

O Vṛnde! In the bhakti-tantras, highly expert paṇḍitas
have declared you to be Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastime potency
(līlā-śakti), and in this world you assume the form of
the renowned Tulasī tree—I offer praṇāma unto your lotus
feet.



bhaktyā vihīnā aparādha-lakṣaiḥ

kṣiptāś ca kāmādi-taraṅga-madhye

kṛpāmayi! tvāṁ śaraṇaṁ prapannā

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam (8)

O merciful Vṛndā-devī! Devoid of devotion and guilty of
unlimited offences, I am being tossed about in the ocean
of material existence by the turbulent waves of lust,
anger, greed, and other inauspicious qualities.
Therefore, I take shelter of you as I offer praṇāma unto
your lotus feet.



vṛndāṣṭakaṁ yaḥ śṛṇuyāt paṭhed vā


                          309
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

vṛndāvanādhīśa-padābja-bhṛṅgaḥ

sa prāpya vṛndāvana-nitya-vāsaṁ

tat-prema-sevāṁ labhate kṛtārthaḥ (9)

Those who, like bumblebees at the lotus feet of the
royal couple of Vṛndāvana, hear or recite this aṣṭaka
describing Vṛndā-devī’s glories, will obtain eternal
residence in Vṛndāvana where they will become fulfilled,
being immersed in loving service to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda.




Śrī Yamunāṣṭakam

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



bhrātur antakasya pattane ’bhipatti-hāriṇī

prekṣayāti-pāpino ’pi pāpa-sindhu-tāriṇī

nīra-mādhurībhir apy aśeṣa-citta-bandhinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (1)

May Yamunā-devī, the daughter of the sun-god Sūrya,
always purify me. She saves those who touch her from
going to the realm of her brother Yamarāja, and just
seeing her absolves even greatly wicked people from the
ocean of their sinful deeds (separation from Krsna). The
attractiveness of her waters captures everyone’s heart.



hāri-vāri-dhārayābhimaṇḍitoru-khāṇḍavā

puṇḍarīka-maṇḍalodyad-aṇḍajāli-tāṇḍavā

snāna-kāma-pāmarogra-pāpa-sampad-andhinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (2)

Yamunā-devī adorns Indra’s massive Khāṇḍava forest with
her enchanting current, and upon her blooming white
lotuses, wagtails and other birds are always dancing.
Simply desiring to bathe in her crystalline waters
pardons one from even the greatest of sins. May that
Yamunā-devī, the daughter of Sūrya-deva (friend of the
lotus), always continue to purify me.



śīkarābhimṛṣṭa-jantu-durvipāka-mardinī

nanda-nandanāntaraṅga-bhakti-pūra-vardhinī

tīra-saṅgamābhilāṣi-maṅgalānubandhinī


                          310
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (3)

Sprinkling a single drop of her water upon oneself frees
one from the reaction to even the most heinous crime.
She increases the flow of rāgānugā-bhakti for Nanda-
nandana within one’s heart and benedicts anyone who
simply desires to reside on her banks. May that Yamunā-
devī, the daughter of Sūrya-deva, always purify me.



dvīpa-cakravāla-juṣṭa-sapta-sindhu-bhedinī

śrī-mukunda-nirmitoru-divya-keli-vedinī

kānti-kandalībhir indranīla-vṛnda-nindinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (4)

Yamunā-devī is so inconceivably powerful that although
she flows through the seven oceans which surround the
earth’s seven giant islands, she never merges into them
as ordinary rivers do. Being an intimate witness to Śrī
Mukunda’s wonderful pastimes, she makes those pastimes
arise in the hearts of those who take shelter of her.
Her dark, shimmering beauty defeats that of even a
precious blue sapphire. May that Yamunā-devī, the
daughter of Sūrya-deva, always purify me.



māthureṇa maṇḍalena cāruṇābhimaṇḍitā

prema-naddha-vaiṣṇavādhva-vardhanāya paṇḍitā

ūrmi-dor-vilāsa-padmanābha-pāda-vandinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (5)

Ornamented by the supremely enchanting land of Mathurā-
maṇḍala, Yamunā-devī skillfully inspires rāgānugā-bhakti
in the hearts of the loving Vaiṣṇavas who bathe in her
waters. With her waves which are like playful arms she
worships Padmanābha Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. May that
Yamunā-devī, the daughter of Sūrya-deva, always purify
me.



ramya-tīra-rambhamāṇa-go-kadamba-bhūṣitā

divya-gandha-bhāk-kadamba-puṣpa-rāji-rūṣitā

nanda-sūnu-bhakta-saṅgha-saṅgamābhinandinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (6)

Yamunā-devī’s supremely charming banks are further
beautified by the celestial fragrance emanating from the
flowers of the kadamba trees which grace them and by the
presence of lowing cows. She is especially delighted
when Nandalālā’s devotees assemble on those banks. May
that Yamunā-devī, the daughter of Sūrya-deva, always
purify me.

                          311
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




phulla-pakṣa-mallikākṣa-haṁsa-lakṣa-kūjitā

bhakti-viddha-deva-siddha-kinnarāli-pūjitā

tīra-gandhavāha-gandha-janma-bandha-randhinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (7)

Hundreds and thousands of warbling swans glide on the
fragrant waters of Yamunā-devī, who is worshipable to
demigods, Siddhas, Kinnaras, and humans whose hearts are
dedicated to the service of Śrī Hari. Anyone who is
touched by her gentle breezes is released from the cycle
of birth and death. May that Yamunā-devī, the daughter
of Sūrya-deva, always purify me.



cid-vilāsa-vāri-pūra-bhūr-bhuvaḥ-svar-āpinī

kīrtitāpi durmadoru-pāpa-marma-tāpinī

ballavendra-nandanāṅgarāga-bhaṅga-gandhinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (8)

Yamunā-devī distributes transcendental knowledge
throughout the three worlds known as Bhuḥ, Bhuvaḥ, and
Svaḥ as she flows through them. Singing her glories
burns to ashes the reactions of even the greatest of
sins. She has become supremely fragrant due to the
sandal-paste from the body of King Nanda’s son Śrī Kṛṣṇa
which melts in her waters as He enjoys His water-play.
May that Yamunā-devī, the daughter of Sūrya-deva, always
purify me.



tuṣṭa-buddhir aṣṭakena nirmalormi-ceṣṭitāṁ

tvām anena bhānu-putri! sarva-deva-veṣṭitām

yaḥ stavīti vardhayasva sarva-pāpa-mocane

bhakti-pūram asya devi! puṇḍarīka-locane (9)

He Sūryaputri! Devī! O Yamune, whose powerful waves are
very purifying and who is surrounded by all the
demigods! For those persons of satisfied intelligence
who recite this prayer, please increase their current of
bhakti for the lotus-eyed Śrī Kṛṣṇa who liberates people
from all their sins—this is my supplication at your
feet.




Śrī Lalitāṣṭakam

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī

                          312
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




rādhā-mukunda-pada-sambhava-gharma-bindu-

nirmañchanopakaraṇī-kṛta-deha-lakṣām

uttuṅga-sauhṛda-viśeṣa-vaśāt pragalbhāṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (1)

I offer praṇāma unto the haughty Śrī Lalitā-devī who is
charmingly endowed with many beautiful, sweet qualities
(sulalitā). She has natural expertise in all arts
(lalitā), thus her sevā self-manifests. She wipes away
the glittering drops of perspiration which appear upon
the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā and Mādhava when They meet;
and she is perpetually immersed in the most elevated
mellow of sauhṛda-rasa, or undivided absorption in
fulfilling the heart’s desire of her intimate friend
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



rākā-sudhā-kiraṇa-maṇḍala-kānti-daṇḍi-

vaktra-śriyaṁ cakita-cāru-camūru-netrām

rādhā-prasādhana-vidhāna-kalā-prasiddhāṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (2)

I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Lalitā-devī whose beautiful
face mocks the brilliance of the full moon, whose eyes
are ever-restless like those of a startled doe, who is
famous for her extraordinary expertise in the art of
dressing Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and who is the treasure-house
of unlimited feminine qualities.



lāsyollasad-bhujaga-śatru-patatra-citra-

paṭṭāṁśukābharaṇa-kañculikāñcitāṅgīm

gorocanā-ruci-vigarhaṇa-gaurimāṇaṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (3)

I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Lalitā-devī whose body is
adorned with a splendid sārī as brilliant as the multi-
coloured tail-feathers of an ecstatically dancing
peacock, whose breast is covered with an exceedingly
attractive blouse (kañculi), whose hair part is
decorated with shimmering red vermilion, and who wears
various necklaces and other jeweled ornaments. Her
golden complexion defeats that of even gorocanā [bright
golden pigment that comes when rain-water from svati-
nakśatra hits the head of a qualified cow] and she
possesses innumerable good qualities.

dhūrte vrajendra-tanaye tanu suṣṭhu-vāmyaṁ

mā dakṣiṇā bhāva kalaṅkini lāghavāya

                          313
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


rādhe giraṁ śṛṇu hitām iti śikṣayantīṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (4)

I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Lalitā-devī, the charming
treasure-house of all good qualities, who instructs
Śrīmatī Rādhikā in this way: “O Kalaṅkini (unchaste
one)! Rādhe! Listen to my good instructions which are
favorable for you! Vrajendra-nandana is very crafty
(dhūrta). Don’t display Your mood of gentle submission
(dakṣiṇā bhāva) to Him; instead, in all circumstances be
contrary.”



rādhām abhi-vraja-pateḥ kṛtam ātmajena

kūṭaṁ manāg api vilokya vilohitākṣīm

vāg-bhaṅgibhis tam acireṇa vilajjayantīṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (5)

I offer praṇāma unto the abode of all good qualities,
the supremely charming Śrī Lalitā-devī, who, upon
hearing Śrī Kṛṣṇa speak even a few sly words to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, immediately becomes furious and shames Kṛṣṇa
with her biting, sarcastic remarks, “You are so truthful
and simple-hearted, and such a chaste lover!”



vātsalya-vṛnda-vasatiṁ paśupāla-rājñyāḥ

sakhyānuśikṣaṇa-kalāsu guruṁ sakhīnām

rādhā-balāvaraja-jīvita-nirviśeṣāṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (6)

I offer praṇāma unto the supremely charming Śrī Lalitā-
devī, who possesses all divine qualities; who is also
the recipient of Yaśodā-devī’s parental affection; the
guru of all the sakhīs, instructing them in the art of
friendship; and the very life of both Śrīmatī Rādhikā
and the younger brother of Baladeva.



yāṁ kām api vraja-kule vṛṣabhānu-jāyāḥ

prekṣya sva-pakṣa-padavīm anuruddhyamānām

sadyas tad-iṣṭa-ghaṭanena kṛtārthayantīṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (7)

I offer praṇāma unto the supremely charming Śrī Lalitā-
devī, the treasure-house of all good qualities. Upon
seeing any young maiden anywhere in Vraja and discerning
that she is inclined towards her priya-sakhī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, Lalitā immediately tells Rādhā that She must
accept this person in Her own party (sva-pakṣa). Rādhā

                          314
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

obeys Lalitā, who thus fulfills that maiden’s desires.



rādhā-vrajendra-suta-saṅgama-raṅga-caryāṁ

varyāṁ viniścitavatīm akhilotsavebhyaḥ

tāṁ gokula-priya-sakhī-nikuramba-mukhyāṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (8)

I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Lalitā-devī, the embodiment of
all divine virtues and the foremost of all the favorite
sakhīs of Gokula. Her primary task is providing pleasure
for Śrī Rādhā-Govinda by arranging Their meetings—this
delightful sevā surpasses the enjoyment of all the best
festivals combined together.



nandan amūni lalitā-guṇa-lālitāni

padyāni yaḥ paṭhati nirmala-dṛṣṭir aṣṭau

prītyā vikarṣati janaṁ nija-vṛnda-madhye

taṁ kīrtidā-pati-kulojjvala-kalpa-vallī (9)

If a person with a cheerful and pure heart recites this
aṣṭaka in praise of Lalitā-devī, he will be
affectionately brought into Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s own group
of sakhīs. Lalitā-devī is superbly ornamented with
beauty, grace and charm, and, along with Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, is the effulgent wish-fulfilling creeper
(kalpa-vallī) of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja’s family that winds
around the kalpa-vṛkṣa of Kṛṣṇa.




Śrī Śikṣāṣṭakam

Spoken by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu



ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahādāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ

śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyāvadhū-jīvanam

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ

sarvātma-snapanaṁ paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam
(1)

Let there be supreme victory for the chanting of the
holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which cleanses the mirror of the
heart and completely extinguishes the blazing forest
fire of material existence. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana
diffuses the soothing moon rays of bhāva which cause the
white lotus of good fortune for the jīvas to bloom. The
holy name is the life and soul of transcendental

                          315
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

knowledge, since Vidyā (divya Sarasvatī-devī) is Śrī
Nāma Prabhu’s consort. It continuously increases the
ocean of transcendental bliss, enabling one to taste
complete nectar at every step. The holy name thoroughly
bathes and cools the body, mind and soul.



nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis

tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ

etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi

durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nanurāgaḥ (2)

O Bhagavān! Your holy name bestows all auspiciousness
upon the living entities. Therefore, for the benefit of
the jīvas, You eternally manifest Your innumerable
names, such as Rāma, Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Mukunda, Mādhava,
Govinda, and Dāmodara. You have invested those names
with all the potencies of their respective forms. Out of
causeless mercy, You have not even imposed any
restrictions on the chanting and remembrance of such
names. Nonetheless, I am so unfortunate due to
committing offenses that I have no attachment for Your
holy name, which is so easily accessible and bestows all
good fortune.

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ (3)

Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than the insignificant grass which is trampled beneath
the feet of all, being more tolerant than a tree,
accepting no honor, but offering respect to all others
according to their respective positions, one should
continuously chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.



na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ

kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye

mama janmani janmanīśvare

bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi (4)

O Jagadīśa! I do not desire wealth, followers such as
wife, sons, friends and relatives, nor mundane knowledge
expressed in poetic language. My only desire, O
Prāṇeśvara, is that in birth after birth I may have
ahaitukī-bhakti unto Your lotus feet.



ayi nanda-tanūja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-


                             316
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

sthita-dhūli-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya (5)

O Nanda-nandana! Please be merciful upon me, Your
eternal servant, fallen in the turbulent ocean of
material existence as a result of my fruitive actions.
Please consider me as a particle of dust affixed to Your
lotus feet and accept me forever as Your indentured
servant.



nayanaṁ galad-aśru-dhārayā

vadanaṁ gadgada-ruddhayā girā

pulakair nicitaṁ vapuḥ kadā

tava nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati (6)

O Prabhu! When will my eyes be filled with a stream of
tears? When will my voice choke up? And when will the
hairs of my body stand erect in ecstacy as I chant Your
holy name?



yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam

śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa me (7)

O sakhī! In separation from Govinda, even a moment seems
like a millenium. Tears begin to shower from my eyes
like rain from the clouds, and this entire world seems
void.



āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu mām

adarśanān marma-hatāṁ karotu vā

yathā tathā vā vidadhātu lampaṭo

mat-prāṇa-nāthas tu sa eva nāparaḥ (8)

Let Kṛṣṇa tightly embrace this maidservant who is
attached to the service of His lotus feet, and thus make
Me His very own. Or let Him break My heart by not being
present before Me. He is a debauchee and can do whatever
He likes. Even if He cavorts with other lovers directly
in front of Me, He is still my prāṇanātha. I have no one
other than Him.




Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Nāmāṣṭakam

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī



nikhila-śruti-mauli-ratna-mālā,

                             317
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


dyuti-nīrājita-pāda-paṅkajānta

ayi mukta-kulair upāsyamānaṁ,

paritas tvāṁ harināma! saṁśrayāmi (1)

O Harināma! I take complete shelter of You. The nails of
Your lotus feet are worshiped by the glowing radiance
emanating from the necklace of jewels known as the
Upaniṣads, which themselves are the crown-jewel of all
the śrutis. You are also worshiped by the liberated
sages.



jaya nāmadheya! muni-vṛnda-geya!

jana-rañjanāya param akṣarākṛte!

tvam anādarād api manāg udīritaṁ,

nikhilogra-tāpa-paṭalīṁ vilumpasi (2)

O Harināma, who are sung by the sages! O You who have
assumed the form of supreme syllables to give great
happiness to the devotees! All glories to You. May Your
supremacy always be manifest. If You are spoken only
once, even disrespectfully or in jest, You absolve all
of one’s frightful sins at the root.



yad-ābhāso ’py udyan-kavalita-bhava-dhvānta-vibhavo

dṛśaṁ tattvāndhānām api diśati bhakti-praṇayinīm

janas tasyodāttaṁ jagati bhagavan nāma-taraṇe!

kṛtī te nirvaktuṁ ka iha mahimānaṁ prabhavati? (3)

O sun of Bhagavān-nāma! What learned scholar in this
world is competent to describe Your unsurpassed glories?
Even ābhāsa, the dim light of Your early dawn, swallows
up the darkness of ignorance which blinds the
conditioned souls and enables them to envision hari-
bhakti.



yad-brahma-sākṣāt-kṛti-niṣṭhayāpi,

vināśam āyāti vinā na bhogaiḥ

apaiti nāma! sphuraṇena tat te,

prārabdha-karmeti virauti vedaḥ (4)

O Nāma! The Vedas loudly declare that even without a
devotee undergoing any suffering, his prārabdha-karma,
which cannot be eliminated even by resolute meditation
on impersonal Brahman, is at once mitigated by Your
appearance on the tongue.


                          318
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017



agha-damana-yaśodā-nandanau! nanda-sūno!

kamala-nayana-gopī-candra-vṛndāvanendrāḥ!

praṇata-karuṇa-kṛṣṇāv ity aneka-svarūpe

tvayi mama ratir uccair vardhatāṁ nāmadheya (5)

O Nāma! May my love for You in Your many forms such as
Agha-damana, Yaśodā-nandana, Nanda-sūno, Kamala-nayana,
Gopīcandra, Vṛndāvanendra, and Praṇata-karuṇa, always
increase.



vācyaṁ vācakam ity udeti bhavato nāma! svarūpa-dvayaṁ

pūrvasmāt param eva hanta karuṇaṁ tatrāpi jānīmahe

yas tasmin vihitāparādha-nivahaḥ prāṇī samantād bhaved

āsyenedam upāsya so ’pi hi sadānandāmbudhau majjati (6)

O Nāma! In the material world You manifest in two forms:
as vācya, the Paramātmā inside the heart of each soul,
and as vācaka, or the sound vibration of names such as
Kṛṣṇa and Govinda. We know Your second form to be more
merciful to us than the first because by chanting, the
second form is worshiped, and even those who have
committed offences to Your first form are plunged into
an ocean of bliss.



sūditāśrita-janārti-rāśaye, ramya-cid-ghana-sukha-
svarūpiṇe

nāma! gokula-mahotsavāya te, kṛṣṇa!

pūrṇa-vapuṣe namo namaḥ (7)

O Kṛṣṇa-nāma! You destroy the sufferings of those who
take shelter of You. You are the playful embodiment of
saccidānanda, the great festival of Gokula, and are all-
pervading. I offer praṇāma unto You time and again.



nārada-vīṇojjīvana! sudhormi-niryāsa-mādhurī-pūra!

tvaṁ kṛṣṇa-nāma! kāmaṁ, sphura me rasane rasena sadā (8)

O life of Nārada’s vīṇā, O You who are like waves of the
essence of all nectar in the ocean of sweetnesses! O
Kṛṣṇa-nāma! By Your own volition, please always sweetly
appear on my tongue.




Nāma-kīrtana

                          319
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




jaya govinda jaya gopāla

keśava mādhava dīna-dayāla

śyāmasundara kanhaiyā-lāla

giri-vara-dhārī nanda-dulāla

acyuta keśava śridhara mādhava

gopāla govinda hari

yamunā puliname vaṁśī bajāve

naṭavara veśadhārī

—

śrī kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda

govinda he nanda-kiśora kṛṣṇa

hā śrī yaśodā-tanaya prasīda

śrī ballavī-jīvana rādhikeśa




Hari Hari Govinda Hari

Refrain: hari hari govinda hari



kāliya-mardana kaṁsa-nisūdana

debakī-nandana rāma hare (1)

O crusher of Kāliya! O killer of Kaṁsa! O delight of
Devakī! O Rāma! O Hari!



matsya kacchapa-bara śūkara narahari

bāmana bhṛgu-suta rakṣa-kulāre

śrī-baladeva bauddha kalki nārāyaṇa

deba janārdana śrī-kaṁsāre (2)

O Matysa! O Kūrma! O Varāha! O Nṛsiṁha! O Vāmana! O
Paraśurāma! O enemy of the demons! O Balarāma! O Buddha!
O Kalki! O Nārāyaṇa! O Lord who rescues the devotees
from a host of troubles! O enemy of Kaṁsa!



keśaba mādhaba yādaba yadu-pati

                             320
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


daitya-dalana duḥkha-bhañjana śaure

goloka-indu gokula-candra gadādhara

garuḍa-dhwaja gaja-mocana murāre (3)

O Kesava! O Madhava! O Yadava! O king of the Yadusa! O
Lord who rips the demons into shreds! O Lord who breaks
sufferings into pieces! O descendant of King Śūrasena! O
Lord like a moon shining in this world! O Lord like a
moon shining in Gokula! O Lord who holds a mace! O Lord
who flies a banner marked with Garuḍa! O Lord who
delivered Gajendra! O enemy of Mura!



śrī-puruṣottama parameśwara prabhu

parama-brahma parameṣṭhī aghāre

duḥkhite dayāṁ kuru deba debakī-suta

durmati paramānanda parihāre (4)

O supreme person! O supreme controller! O master! O
Supreme Brahman! O Supreme Lord! O enemy of Agha! O
Lord, O son of Devakī, please be merciful to miserable,
troubled, wicked-hearted Paramānanda dāsa!



Gopī Gītā

Śrimad-Bhāgavatam 10.31 - 32



jayati te ’dhikaṁ janmanā vrajaḥ

śrayata indirā śaśvad atra hi

dayita dṛśyatāṁ dikṣu tāvakās

tvayi dhṛtāsavas tvāṁ vicinvate (1)

The gopīs said: O beloved, Your birth in the land of
Vraja has made it exceedingly glorious, and thus Indirā,
the goddess of fortune, always resides here. It is only
for Your sake that we, Your devoted servants, maintain
our lives. We have been searching everywhere for You, so
please show Yourself to us.



śarad-udāśaye sādhu-jāta-sat-

sarasijodara-śrī-muṣā dṛśā

surata-nātha te ‘śulka-dāsikā

vara-da nighnato neha kiṁ vadhaḥ (2)

O Lord of love, in beauty Your glance excels the whorl

                             321
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

of the finest, most perfectly formed lotus within the
autumn pond. O bestower of benedictions, You are killing
the maidservants who have given themselves to You
freely, without any price. Isn’t this murder?



viṣa-jalāpyayād vyāla-rākṣasād

varṣa-mārutād vaidyutānalāt

vṛṣa-mayātmajād viśvato bhayād

ṛṣabha te vayaṁ rakṣitā muhuḥ (3)

O greatest of personalities, You have repeatedly saved
us from all kinds of danger-from poisoned water (of the
Yamunā, contaminated by Kāliya), from the terrible man-
eater Agha, from the great rains (sent by Indra), from
the wind demon (Tṛṇāvarta), from the fiery thunderbolt
of Indra, from the bull demon (Ariṣṭāsura) and from the
son of Maya Dānava (Vyomāsura).



na khalu gopīkā-nandano bhavān

akhila-dehinām antarātma-dṛk

vikhanasārthito viśva-guptaye

sakha udeyivān sātvatāṁ kule (4)

You are not actually the son of the gopī Yaśodā, O
friend, but rather the indwelling witness in the hearts
of all embodied souls. Because Lord Brahmā prayed for
You to come and protect the universe, You have now
appeared in the Sātvata dynasty.



viracitābhayaṁ vṛṣṇi-dhūrya te

caraṇam īyuṣāṁ saṁsṛter bhayāt

kara-saroruhaṁ kānta kāma-daṁ

śirasi dhehi naḥ śrī-kara-graham (5)

O best of the Vṛṣṇis, Your    lotuslike hand, which holds
the hand of the goddess of    fortune, grants fearlessness
to those who approach Your    feet out of fear of material
existence. O lover, please    place that wish-fulfilling
lotus hand on our heads.



vraja-janārti-han vīra yoṣitāṁ

nija-jana-smaya-dhvaṁsana-smita

bhaja sakhe bhavat-kiṅkarīḥ sma no

jalaruhānanaṁ cāru darśaya (6)

                             322
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


O You who destroy the suffering of Vraja’s people, O
hero of all women, Your smile shatters the false pride
of Your devotees. Please, dear friend, accept us as Your
maidservants and show us Your beautiful lotus face.



praṇata-dehināṁ pāpa-karṣaṇaṁ

tṛṇa-carānugaṁ śrī-niketanam

phaṇi-phaṇārpitaṁ te padāmbujaṁ

kṛṇu kuceṣu naḥ kṛndhi hṛc-chayam (7)

Your lotus feet destroy the past sins of all embodied
souls who surrender to them. Those feet follow after the
cows in the pastures and are the eternal abode of the
goddess of fortune. Since You once put those feet on the
hoods of the great serpent Kāliya, please place them
upon our breasts and tear away the lust in our hearts.



madhurayā girā valgu-vākyayā

budha-manojñayā puṣkarekṣaṇa

vidhi-karīr imā vīra muhyatīr

adhara-sīdhunāpyāyayasva naḥ (8)

O lotus-eyed one, Your sweet voice and charming words,
which attract the minds of the intelligent, are
bewildering us more and more. Our dear hero, please
revive Your maidservants with the nectar of Your lips.



tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanaṁ

kavibhir īḍitaṁ kalmaṣāpaham

śravaṇa-maṅgalaṁ śrīmad ātataṁ

bhuvi gṛṇanti ye bhūri-dā janāḥ (9)

The nectar of Your words and the descriptions of Your
activities are the life and soul of those suffering in
this material world. These narrations, transmitted by
learned sages, eradicate one’s sinful reactions and
bestow good fortune upon whoever hears them. These
narrations are broadcast all over the world and are
filled with spiritual power. Certainly those who spread
the message of Godhead are most munificent.



prahasitaṁ priya-prema-vīkṣaṇaṁ

viharaṇaṁ ca te dhyāna-maṅgalam

rahasi saṁvido yā hṛdi spṛśaḥ

                          323
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


kuhaka no manaḥ kṣobhayanti hi (10)

Your smiles, Your sweet, loving glances, the intimate
pastimes and confidential talks we enjoyed with You-all
these are auspicious to meditate upon, and they touch
our hearts. But at the same time, O deceiver, they very
much agitate our minds.



calasi yad vrajāc cārayan paśūn

nalina-sundaraṁ nātha te padam

śila-tṛṇāṅkuraiḥ sīdatīti naḥ

kalilatāṁ manaḥ kānta gacchati (11)

Dear master, dear lover, when You leave the cowherd
village to herd the cows, our minds are disturbed with
the thought that Your feet, more beautiful than a lotus,
will be pricked by the spiked husks of grain and the
rough grass and plants.



dina-parikṣaye nīla-kuntalair

vanaruhānanaṁ bibhrad āvṛtam

ghana-rajasvalaṁ darśayan muhur

manasi naḥ smaraṁ vīra yacchasi (12)

At the end of the day You repeatedly show us Your lotus
face, covered with dark blue locks of hair and thickly
powdered with dust. Thus, O hero, You arouse lusty
desires in our minds.



praṇata-kāma-daṁ padmajārcitaṁ

dharaṇi-maṇḍanaṁ dhyeyam āpadi

caraṇa-paṅkajaṁ śantamaṁ ca te

ramaṇa naḥ staneṣv arpayādhi-han (13)

Your lotus feet, which are worshiped by Lord Brahmā,
fulfill the desires of all who bow down to them. They
are the ornament of the earth, they give the highest
satisfaction, and in times of danger they are the
appropriate object of meditation. O lover, O destroyer
of anxiety, please put those lotus feet upon our
breasts.



surata-vardhanaṁ śoka-nāśanaṁ

svarita-veṇunā suṣṭhu cumbitam


                          324
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

itara-rāga-vismāraṇaṁ nṛṇāṁ

vitara vīra nas te ‘dharāmṛtam (14)

O hero, kindly distribute to us the nectar of Your lips,
which enhances conjugal pleasure and vanquishes grief.
That nectar is thoroughly relished by Your vibrating
flute and makes people forget any other attachment.



aṭati yad bhavān ahni kānanaṁ

truṭi yugāyate tvām apaśyatām

kuṭila-kuntalaṁ śrī-mukhaṁ ca te

jaḍa udīkṣatāṁ pakṣma-kṛd dṛśām (15)

When You go off to the forest during the day, a tiny
fraction of a second becomes like a millennium for us
because we cannot see You. And even when we can eagerly
look upon Your beautiful face, so lovely with its
adornment of curly locks, our pleasure is hindered by
our eyelids, which were fashioned by the foolish
creator.



pati-sutānvaya-bhrātṛ-bāndhavān

ativilaṅghya te ‘nty acyutāgatāḥ

gati-vidas tavodgīta-mohitāḥ

kitava yoṣitaḥ kas tyajen niśi (16)

Dear Acyuta, You know very well why we have come here.
Who but a cheater like You would abandon young women who
come to see Him in the middle of the night, enchanted by
the loud song of His flute? Just to see You, we have
completely rejected our husbands, children, ancestors,
brothers and other relatives.



rahasi saṁvidaṁ hṛc-chayodayaṁ

prahasitānanaṁ prema-vīkṣaṇam

bṛhad-uraḥ śriyo vīkṣya dhāma te

muhur ati-spṛhā muhyate manaḥ (17)

Our minds are repeatedly bewildered as we think of the
intimate conversations we had with You in secret, feel
the rise of lust in our hearts and remember Your smiling
face, Your loving glances and Your broad chest, the
resting place of the goddess of fortune. Thus we
experience the most severe hankering for You.



vraja-vanaukasāṁ vyaktir aṅga te

                          325
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


vṛjina-hantry alaṁ viśva-maṅgalam

tyaja manāk ca nas tvat-spṛhātmanāṁ

sva-jana-hṛd-rujāṁ yan niṣūdanam (18)

O beloved, Your all-auspicious appearance vanquishes the
distress of those living in Vraja’s forests. Our minds
long for Your association. Please give to us just a bit
of that medicine, which counteracts the disease in Your
devotees’ hearts.



yat te sujāta-caraṇāmburuhaṁ staneṣu

bhītāḥ śanaiḥ priya dadhīmahi karkaśeṣu

tenāṭavīm aṭasi tad vyathate na kiṁ svit

kūrpādibhir bhramati dhīr bhavad-āyuṣāṁ naḥ (19)

O dearly beloved! Your lotus feet are so soft that we
place them gently on our breasts, fearing that Your feet
will be hurt. Our life rests only in You. Our minds,
therefore, are filled with anxiety that Your tender feet
might be wounded by pebbles as You roam about on the
forest path.



iti gopyaḥ pragāyantyaḥ

pralapantyaś ca citradhā

ruruduḥ su-svaraṁ rājan

kṛṣṇa-darśana-lālāsāḥ (20)

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, having thus sung and
spoken their hearts out in various charming ways, the
gopīs began to weep loudly. They were very eager to see
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



tāsām āvirabhūc chauriḥ

smayamāna-mukhāmbujaḥ

pītāmbara-dharaḥ sragvī

sākṣān manmatha-manmathaḥ (21)

Then Śrī Kṛṣṇa, a smile on His lotus face, appeared
before the gopīs. Wearing a garland and a yellow
garment, He directly appeared as one who can bewilder
the mind of Cupid, who himself bewilders the minds of
ordinary people.




                             326
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


Śrī Anurāga-Valli

—The Burgeoning Vine of Love—

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura



dehārbudāni bhagavan! yugapat prayaccha

vaktrārbudāni ca punaḥ pratideham eva

jihvārbudāni kṛpayā prativaktram eva

nṛtyantu teṣu tava nātha! guṇārbudāni (1)

He Bhagavān! Please be merciful and grant me millions of
bodies. Then give each of those bodies millions of
mouths and each of those mouths millions of tongues. He
Nātha! And on each of those tongues may Your millions of
divine attributes dance eternally.

kim ātmanā? yatra na deha-koṭyo

dehena kiṁ? yatra na vaktra-koṭyaḥ

vaktreṇa kiṁ? yatra na koṭi-jihvāḥ

kiṁ jihvayā? yatra na nāma-koṭyaḥ (2)

What is the use of a soul that does not have millions of
bodies? What is the use of a body which does not have
millions of mouths, and what is the use of a mouth which
does not possess millions of tongues? And what is the
use of a tongue on which Your millions of names don’t
dance?



ātmāstu nityaṁ śata-deha-vartī

dehastu nāthāstu sahasra-vaktraḥ

vaktraṁ sadā rājatu lakṣa-jihvaṁ

gṛhṇātu jihvā tava nāma-koṭim (3)

He Nātha! May my soul perpetually possess hundreds of
bodies, may each body possess thousands of mouths, and
may each mouth have hundreds of thousands of tongues
upon which Your millions of names will dance.



yadā yadā mādhava! yatra yatra

gāyanti ye ye tava nāma-līlāḥ

tatraiva karṇāyuta-dhāryamāṇās

tās te sudhā nityam ahaṁ dhayāni (4)

He Mādhava! My special supplication is that I be present

                          327
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

before Your deity form or anywhere else, with thousands
of ears with which to perpetually drink the nectar of
Your devotees’ kīrtana of Your nāma, rūpa, guṇa, and
līlā.



karṇāyutasyaiva bhavantu lakṣa-

koṭyo rasajñā bhagavaṁs tadaiva

yenaiva līlāḥ śṛṇavāni nityaṁ

tenaiva gāyāni tataḥ sukhaṁ me (5)

He Bhagavān! And as I drink such nectar with millions of
ears, may I have millions of tongues with which to
incessantly extol the nāma, rūpa, guṇa, and līlā which I
hear—in this way I will remain forever immersed in
divine bliss.



karṇāyutasyekṣaṭa-koṭir asyā

hṛt-koṭir asyā rasanārbudaṁs tāt

śrutvaiva dṛṣṭvā tava rūpa-sindhum

āliṅgya mādhuryam aho! dhayāni (6)

May each of my millions of ears be accompanied by
millions of eyes, may each of those eyes be accompanied
by millions of hearts, and may those millions of hearts
be accompanied by millions of tongues. Then those
millions of ears will perpetually hear the glories of
the ocean of Your beauty, those millions of eyes will
perpetually receive darśana of that beauty, those
millions of hearts will perpetually embrace it, and
those billions of tongues will incessantly drink its
nectar.



netrārbudasyaiva bhavantu karṇa-

nāsā-rasajñā hṛdayārbudaṁ vā

saundarya-sausvarya-sugandha-pūra-

mādhurya-saṁśleṣa-rasānubhūtyai (7)

May I have millions of eyes to drink the nectar of Your
beauty, millions of ears to hear Your very sweet voice,
millions of noses to smell Your fragrance, millions of
tongues to taste Your sweetness, and millions of hearts
with which to obtain the nectar of Your embrace.

tvat-pārśva-gatyai pada-koṭir astu

sevāṁ vidhātuṁ mama hasta-koṭiḥ

tāṁ śikṣituṁs tadapi buddhi-koṭir


                          328
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                         5/5/2017

etān varān me bhagavan! prayaccha (8)

May I have millions of feet to employ in going to Your
side, millions of hands with which to attend You, and
millions of times intelligence to learn how to serve
You. He Bhagavān! Please be merciful and grant me these
benedictions.




HINDI SONGS



Guru-Caraṇa-Kamala Bhaja Mana

—O Mind! Just Worship the Lotus Feet of Guru—

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyāṇa Mahārāja



guru-caraṇa-kamala bhaja mana

guru-kṛpā binā nāhi koi sādhana-bala,

bhaja mana bhaja anukṣaṇa (1)

O mind! Just worship the lotus feet of Gurudeva! Without
Gurudeva’s mercy we have no strength in our sādhana.
Therefore, O mind, worship and serve him at every
moment!



milatā nahiṁ esā durlabha janama,

bhramata huṅ caudaha bhuvan

kisī ko milte haiṅ aho bhāgya se,

hari-bhaktoṅ ke daraśan (2)

Without coming to Śrī Guru in this rare human birth, we
are simply wandering about these fourteen planes! Oh,
how fortunate we are to have come to him—to get the
darśana of Śrī Hari’s devotee!



kṛṣṇa-kṛpā kī ānanda mūrati,

dīna-jana karuṇā-nidāna

bhakti bhāva prema—tīna prakāśata,

śrī guru patita pāvana (3)

Śrī Guru is the blissful embodiment of Kṛṣṇa’s mercy and
the reservoir of compassion for the destitute souls. He
enlightens us in bhakti, bhāva, and prema and is the
saviour of the fallen!

                             329
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017




śruti smṛti itihāsa purānana mārhiṅ,

kīno spaṣṭa pramāṇa

tana-mana-jīvana, guru-pade arpaṇa,

śrī (sadā) harīnāma raṭana (4)

All the śrutis, smṛtis, and Purāṇas describe Śrī Guru’s
glories. Offering my body, mind and very life to the
feet of Gurudeva I incessantly sing śrī harināma!




Gurudeva, Kṛpa Karke

gurudeva, kṛpa karke mujhe ko apanā lenā

maiṅ ne śaraṇa pāḍā terī, caraṇo me jagaha denā

caraṇo me jagaha denā (1)

Gurudeva! Bestow your mercy on me and accept me as your
own. I have taken shelter of you. Please give me a place
at your lotus feet.



karuṇā-nidhi nāma terā, karuṇā barasavo tum

soye huye bhagyoṅ ko, he nātha jagāo tum

merī nāva bhaṅvara dole, use pāra lagā denā (2)

Please shower your mercy on me because you are renowned
as a storehouse of mercy. O my lord, only then will my
sleeping fortune wake up. My boat is caught in a
whirlpool. Please take me across this turbulent ocean.



tum sukha ke sāgara ho, bhakti ke sahāre ho

mere man meṅ samāe ho, mujhe prāṇoṅ se pyāre ho

nita mālā japuṅ terī, mere doṣa bhulā denā (3)

You are the ocean of happiness and shelter for bhakti.
You are dearer to me than my life and are always on my
mind. I chant your name every day. Please ignore my
faults.



maiṅ santoṅ kā sevaka hūṅ, guru caraṇoṅ kā dāsa hūṅ

nahīṅ nātha bhulānā mujhe, īśa jaga meiṅ akelā huṅ

tere dvāra kā bhikhārī hūṅ, nahīṅ dil se bhulā denā (4)

                            330
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017


I am a servant of the Vaiṣṇavas and of the lotus feet of
my Guru. Please do not forget me because I am all alone,
O Lord. I am a beggar at your door. Please do not ignore
me.




Vraja Jana Mana Sukhakārī

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyāṇa Mahārāja



Refrain:

vraja-jana-mana-sukhakārī

rādhe-śyāma śyāmā śyāma

Kṛṣṇa gives happiness in the hearts of all the
Vrajavāsīs—Rādhe! Śyāma! Śyāmā! Śyāma!



mor mukuṭa makarākṛt-kuṇḍala, gala vaijayantī-māla,

caraṇana nūpura rasāla

rādhe-śyāma śyāmā śyāma (1)

He wears a peacock feather mukuṭ, swinging fish-shaped
earrings, and a vaijayantī garland around His neck, and
the sound of His anklebells is full of rasa! Rādhe!
Śyāma! Śyāmā! Śyāma!



sundara vadana kamala-dala-locana, bāṅkī cita-vana-hārī,

mohana-baṁśī-vihārī

rādhe-śyāma śyāmā śyāma (2)

His lotus face is very beautiful and His eyes are like
lotus-petals. Wandering here and there, He charms
everyone with His flute and three-fold curved form!
Rādhe! Śyāma! Śyāmā! Śyāma!



vṛndāvana meṅ dhenu carāve, gopī-jana manohārī

śrī govardhana-dhārī

rādhe-śyāma śyāmā śyāma (3)

In Vṛndāvana He tends the cows in the pastures, steals
the gopīs’ minds, and holds up Śrī Govardhana Hill!
Rādhe! Śyāma! Śyāmā! Śyāma!



                            331
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


rādhā-kṛṣṇa mili ab dou, gaura-rūpa avatārī

kīrtana dharama pracārī

rādhe-śyāma śyāmā śyāma (4)

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa have united and now the two have come as
the beautiful golden avatāra, preaching kīrtana dharma.
Rādhe! Śyāma! Śyāmā! Śyāma!



tum vinā mere aura na koi, nāma-rūpa avatārī

caraṇana meṅ balihārī,

nārāyaṇa balihārī,

rādhe-śyāma śyāmā śyāma (5)

I have no one but You in this world. You descend as the
avatāra of the beautiful name and beautiful form. Your
lotus feet fill me with wonder—so this Nārāyaṇa is
filled with delight! Rādhe! Śyāma! Śyāmā! Śyāma!




Pāra Kareṇge

(traditional song)



pāra kareṅge naiyā re, bhaja kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā

kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā dāūjī ke bhaiyā (1)

Worship Kanhaiyā*, the brother of Balarāma. Kanhaiyā’s
lotus feet are the boat to take us across the ocean of
material life.

[*Kanhaiyā—Yaśodā Maiyā’s pet name for her darling son.
This name is brimming over with sweetness and
affection.]



kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā baṁśī bajaiyā,

mākhana curaiyā re, bhaja kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā (2)

Worship Kanhaiyā, that Kṛṣṇa who stays in Vraja, playing
the flute and from every gopī’s house steals butter
(that is, the soft and pure white hearts that are like
butter).



kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā girivara uṭhaiyā,

kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā rāsa racaiyā

                          332
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017


pāra kareṅge naiyā re, bhaja kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā (3)

Worship Kanhaiyā, that Kṛṣṇa who lifted Govardhana Hill
and performed the rāsa-līlā. His lotus feet are the boat
to take us across the ocean of material life.



mitra sudāmā taṇḍula lāe,

gale lagā prabhu bhoga lagāye

kahāṅ kahāṅ kaha bhaiyā re, bhaja kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā (4)

When His friend Sudāma brought Him some low-grade rice,
He accepted it, embraced him and cried, “O My brother,
you haven’t come for such a long time! Where have you
been? Did you forget Me?” Worship that Kṛṣṇa!



arjuna kā ratha raṇa me hākā,

śyāmaliyā giridhārī bākā

kālī-nāga nathaiyā re, bhaja kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā (5)

In the Mahābharata war Śyāmaliyā (sweet, black, crooked
Kṛṣṇa) became Arjuna’s chariot driver, directing the
horses on the battlefield. He lifted Govardhana Hill at
such a tender age and He subdued Kālīya Nāga by putting
a rope through his nose, dragging him out of the Yamunā.
Worship that Kṛṣṇa!



drupata-sutā jaba duṣṭana gherī,

rākhī lāja na kīnī derī

āge cīra baḍhaiyā re, bhaja kṛṣṇa kanhaiyā (6)

Worship that Kanhaiyā who immediately came to protect
Draupadī’s chastity by increasing her cloth unlimitedly
when she was surrounded by so many wicked men.




Ālī! Mohe Lāge Vṛndāvana Nīko



ālī! mohe lāge vṛndāvana nīko, niko lage hari ko

ghara ghara tulasī, ṭhākura pūjā, darśana govindajī ko

ālī! mhāne lāge vṛndāvana nīko

O friend! I like Vṛndāvana so much, where in every home
there is worship of tulasī and the Deity with darśana of
Govindajī

                            333
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017




nirmala nīra bahata yamunā ko, bhojana dūdha dahī ko

ālī! mohe lāge vṛndāvana nīko

Where the pure waters of the Yamunā flow and where the
foodstuffs are milk and yoghurt. O friend! I like
Vṛndāvana so much.



ratana siṁhāsana āpa virāje, mukuṭa dharyo tulāsi ko

ālī! mohe lāge vṛndāvana nīko

Where the Deity sits on a jewelled throne, with tulāsi
in His crown. O friend! I like Vṛndāvana very much.



kuñjana kuñjana phirata rādhikā, śabda sunata muralī ko,

ālī! mohe lāge vṛndāvana nīko

Where Rādhikā roams from kuñja to kuñja, having heard
the vibration of His flute. O friend! I like Vṛndāvana
so much.



mīrā ke prabhu giridhāra-nāgara, bhajana binā nara phīko

ālī! mohe lāge vṛndāvana nīko

The hero Giridhārī is the master of Mīrā, who says that
without bhajana a person is dull. O friend! I like
Vṛndāvana so much.




Rādhā-Nāma Parama Sukhadāī



rādhā-nāma parama sukhadāī

Rādhā-nāma bestows supreme happiness.



lahara-lahara śrī śyāmā ju kī mana me mere samāī

May the numerous waves of Śrī Śyāma's love always reside
in my heart.



rata-rata rādhā janāma bitāū, bṛja gopīna kū śīśa navāū

In all my future births may I always bow my head to

                             334
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                           5/5/2017

Rādhā and the Vraja gopīs.



mahimā kahi nahi jāī rādhā nāma parama sukhadāī

Rādhā's glories are indescribable and Her name bestows
the supreme happiness.



braja tyaja ke mai kahi nahi jāū rasika santana ke
darśana pāū

I will never leave Vraja to go elsewhere and I will
always take darśana of rasika saints.



jaga se prīti hatai rādhā-nāma parama sukhadāī

Rādhā's name removes attachment to material life and
bestows the supreme happiness.




Duṣṭa Mana! Tumi Kisera Vaiṣṇava?


Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura



duṣṭa mana tumi kisera vaiṣṇava?

pratiṣṭhāra tare, nirjanera ghare

tava harināma kevala kaitava (1)

O wicked mind! What kind of Vaiṣṇava are you? Your
chanting in a solitary place is simply for pratiṣṭhā,
name and fame. Such chanting is nothing but hypocrisy.



aḍera pratiṣṭhā, śūkarera viṣṭhā

jāna nā ki tāhā māyāra vaibhava

kanaka-kāminī, divasa-yāminī

bhāviyā ki kāja, anitya se saba (2)

Such mundane pratiṣṭhā is hog’s stool. Don’t you know,
it is an allurement of māyā. Day and night you think of
nothing but women and money. What is the use of
meditating on things that are all temporary?



tomāra kanaka, bhogera janaka


                             335
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

kanakera dvāre sevaha mādhava

kāminīra kāma, nahe tava dhāma

tāhāra mālika kevala yādava (3)

You think money is the father of enjoyment, but money is
not meant for your pleasusre. When you claim money as
your own, it only creates within you a lust for
enjoyment. With your money you should serve Mādhava, the
husband of Lakṣmī and the enjoyer of all wealth.
Satisfying the desire of beautiful women is never your
domain, it is only the domain of their proprietor –
Yādava. He alone can fulfuill the hankering of their
heart.



pratiṣṭhāśā-taru, jaḍa-māyā-maru

nā pela rāvaṇa yūjhiya rāghava

vaiṣṇavī pratiṣṭhā, tāte koro niṣṭhā

tāhā nā bhajile labhibe raurava (4)

The tree of desire for pratiṣṭhā, like a mirage, is
situated in the desert of jaḍa-māyā, the illusiory
material energy. Rāvaṇa fought Rāma, wanting to steal
His position. His hope for prestige had grown as mighty
as a great tree within the forest of desires within his
heart, but the soul can find no cooling shade there, for
that “forest” is only a mirage in the desert of material
illusion. Rather than be like Rāvaṇa, firmly situate
yourself on the solid platform whereupon the Vaiṣṇavas
ever stand. If you don’t accept such a position, you
will go to the hell called Raurava.



harijana-dveṣa, pratiṣṭhāśā kleśa

kara kena tabe tāhāra gaurava

vaiṣṇavera pāche, prātiṣṭhāśā āche

tā’ta kabhu nahe anitya-vaibhava (5)

Those who go to great trouble in hopes for prestige as
great devotees, are envious of devotees and are rewarded
for their trouble with a hellish life. However, the
desire for spiritual eminence is easily fulfilled when
one becomes a devotee of the Lord, for eternal fame
automatically follows the heels of a Vaiṣṇava, and that
fame is never to be considered a temporary worldly
opulence.

se hari sambandha, śūnya-māyā-gandha

tāhā kabhu noya jaḍera kaitava

pratiṣṭhā-caṇḍālī, nirjanatā-jālī

ubhaye jāniha māyika-raurava (6)

                          336
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


The genuine fame of the Vaiṣṇavas is in their relation
to Hari; it is devoid of the stench of māyā and has no
trace of the treachery of pretentious imposters. The
self-promotion and fame of a pseudo-Vaiṣṇava is like a
dog-eating witch; his solitary bhajana is fake. O mind,
please know that the artificial fame and bogus bhajana
of pseudo-devotees is a hellish phantasmagoria.



kīrtana chāḍibo, pratiśṭhā mākhibo

ki kāja ḍhuñḍiyā tādṛśā gaurava

mādhavendra purī, bhāva-ghare chūri

nā karilo kabhu sadāi jānabo (7)

“I shall give up chanting the holy name in public
kīrtana and retire to solitude, thus smearing myself
with worldly honor” – why are you searching for such so-
called glory? O mind, know for certain that Mādhavendra
Purī never attained the stage of bhāva by devising such
shortcuts. Gopīnātha Himself awarded him the genuine
fame of being His pure devotee.



tomāra pratiṣṭha, śūkarera viṣṭhā

tāra saha sama kabhu nā mānava

matsaratā-vaśe, tūmi jaḍa-rase

majecho chāḍiyā kīrtana-sauṣṭhava (8)

Your cheap reputation is equal to hog’s stool. You can
never be the same as Mādhavendra Purī, so why try to
compete with him? Out of envy, you have doomed yourself
to relish mundane rasa. The only thing you have truly
renounced is the sublime kṛṣṇa-kīrtana in the
association of devotees.



tāi duṣṭa mana, nirjana-bhajana

prachāricho chale kūyogī-vaibhava

prabhu sanātane, parama yatane

śikṣā dilo yāhā cinto sei saba (9)

Truly, O wicked mind, on the pretense of performing
solitary bhajana you are simply a false yogi cheating
others, presenting yourself as a great devotee to
promote your own nefarious interests. To save yourself
from these pitfalls, you should contemplate with the
utmost care Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s instructions to
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī.




                          337
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

sei du’ṭi kathā, bhūlo’ nā sarvathā

uccaih svare koro harināma-rava

phalgu āra yukta, baddha āra mukta

kabhu nā bhāviho ‘ekākāra saba (10)

Loudly chant the holy name of Hari and never forget the
two most valuable instructions he taught: do not mistake
phalgu and yukta vairagya (false and real renunciation);
and do not mistake baddha and mukta jīvas (bound and
liberated souls). They are never the same.



kanaka-kāminī, pratiṣṭhā-bāghinī

chādiyāche yāe sei to’ vaiṣṇava

sei anāsakta, sei śuddha bhakta

saṁsāra tathāya pāya parābhava (11)

The desire for money, women, and fame are like
tigresses. Those who have given up these things are
Vaiṣṇavas indeed. Such a person, who is detached from
material life, is a pure devotee. Such a devotee has
conquered over the mundane world and its illusions of
enjoyment.



yathā-yogya-bhoga, nāhi tathā roga

anāsakta sei, ki āra kahabo

āsakti rohita sambandha-sahita

viṣaya-samūha sakali mādhava (12)

Those who accept only those sense objects that are
necessary to maintain their bodies for the service of
Krsna, can never fall prey to the disease of material
infatuation. What can be said about their detachment?
Being free from all types of false attachment they see
everything in relation to Krsna, and thus understand
that everything is meant for the pleasure of Mādhava,
the husband of all Lakṣmīs.



se yukta-vairāgya, tāhā to’ saubhāgya

tāhāi jaḍete harira vaibhava

kīrtane yāhāra, pratiṣṭhā-sambhāra

tāhāra sampatti kevala kaitava (13)

Those who are situated in this type of true renunciation
are indeed fortunate. They exist in this mundane world
as the splendor of Hari. However, the so-called treasure
of those who perform kīrtana of Śrī Hari only for

                          338
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

pratiṣṭhā, is simply deceit.



viṣaya-mumukṣu, bhogera bubhukṣu

duye tyajo mana, dui avaiṣṇava

kṛṣṇera sambandha, aprākṛta skandha

kabhu nahe tāhā jaḍera sambhava (14)

O mind, reject the company of those who seek liberation
or material enjoyment, as both types of persons are non-
devotees. One’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa is the stem to
transcendence, which lies outside the reach of anyone
whose consciousness is tied to the mundane world.



māyāvādī jana, kṛṣṇetara mana

mukta abhimāne se ninde vaiṣṇava

vaiṣṇavera dāsa, tava bhakti-āśa

keno vā ḍākicho nirjana-āhava (15)

The māyāvādīs’ minds never contemplate Kṛṣṇa. They pride
themselves on being liberated and blaspheme the
Vaiṣṇavas. O mind, always pray to be the servant of the
Vaiṣṇavas and desire devotion unto them. Why have you
invited this struggle of solitude?



ye phālgur-vairāgī, kohe nije tyāgī

se nā pāre kabhu hoite vaiṣṇava

hari-pada chāḍi’, nirjanatā bāḍi’

labhiyā ki phala, phalgu se vaibhava (16)

The imitators who claim to be true renunciants, can
never become Vaiṣṇavas. O mind, what result will you
gain by giving up the service of the lotus feet of Śrī
Hari and the Vaiṣṇavas, and solely tending to your
solitary bhajana? Such so-called brilliance is a sham.

rādhā-dāsye rohi, chāḍa’ bhoga-ahi

pratiṣṭhāśa nahe kirtana-gaurava

radha-nitya-jana, taha chadi’ mana

keno vā nirjana-bhajana-kaitava (17)

Become situated in rādhā-dāsya, the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and give up the serpent of material enjoyment
(which will devour you). Know that the desire for
respect and adoration is not the glory of kīrtana. O
mind, having given up the association of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s eternal servants, why have you adopted the

                          339
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017

fraudulent practice of solitary bhajana?



vrajavāsi-gaṇa, pracāraka-dhana

pratiṣṭhā-bhikṣuka tā’ra nahe śava

prāṇa āche tāra’, se-hetu pracāra

pratiṣṭhāśā-hīna kṛṣṇa-gāthā saba (18)

The residents of Vraja are the only true preachers in
this world, as they are endowed with the wealth of
kṛṣṇa-prema. They are not devoid of life, and therefore
they do not hanker after worldly distinction. They are
full of the vitality that comes from loving Kṛṣṇa, and
they go out and speak about Him. Whatever they say is
free from the desire for prestige.



śrī-dayita-dāsa, kīrtanete āśa

koro uccaiḥ-svare hari-nāma-rava

kīrtana-prabhāve, smaraṇa hoibe

se-kāle bhajana-nirjana sambhava (19)

Śrī Dayita Dāsa (Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura), the humble servant of Śrī Rādhā and Her
beloved Kṛṣṇa, always hopes for kīrtana, and begs all to
loudly chant the holy name of Śrī Hari. By the power of
congregational chanting, smaraṇam—remembrance of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and His pastimes—will automatically awaken. Only
then will it be possible to go off to solitary place and
engage in Their confidential service.




Śrī Gaura-Ārati

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura

(with refrains)



jaya jaya gorācānder āratiko śobhā

jāhnavī-taṭa-vane jaga-mano-lobhā (1)

(jaga janer mana lobhā)

(gaurāngera ārati śobhā jaga janer mana lobhā)

(jāhnavī taṭa vane jaga janer mana lobhā)

(gaura nityananda ārati śobhā jaga janer mana lobhā)

(jaya nitāi-gaurāṅga)

                             340
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                          5/5/2017




dakhiṇe nitāi-cānd bāme gadādhara

nikaṭe adwaita śrīnivāsa chatra-dhara (2)

(śrīnivāsa chatra dhare)

(gaurāngera ārati kale śrīnivāsa chatra dhare)

(amay doya koro bole śrīnivāsa chatra dhare)



bosiyāche gorācānd ratna-siṁhāsane

(ratna-siṁhāsane ālo, hari he!)

(bosiyāche gorācānd ratna-siṁhāsane)



ārati korena brahmā-ādi deva-gaṇe (3)

(deva gaṇe ārati kore)

(brahmā adi deva gaṇe, deva gaṇe ārati kore)

(gaurāngera ārati kale deva gaṇe ārati kore)

(mahāprabhura ārati kore deva gaṇe ārati kore)

(amay doya koro bole deva gaṇe ārati kore)



narahari-ādi kori’ cāmara ḍhulāya

sañjaya-mukunda-vāsu-ghoṣ-ādi gāya (4)

(vāsu-ghoṣe gana kore)

(gaur nityananda ārati kale vāsu-ghoṣe gana kore)

(jaya nitāi jaya gaura bole vāsu-ghoṣe gana kore)

(jaya nitāi jaya gaura)



śaṅkha bāje, ghaṇṭā bāje, bāje karatāla

madhura mṛdaṅga bāje parama rasāla (5)

(madhura madhura madhura bāje)

(śaṅkha bāje, ghaṇṭā bāje, madhura madhura madhura bāje)

(gaurāngera ārati kale madhura madhura madhura bāje)

(śaṅkha ghaṇṭā, khola, karatāla madhura madhura madhura
bāje)


                           341
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017



bahu-koṭi candra jini’ vadana ujjvala

gala-deśe vana-mālā kore jhalamala (6)

(jhalmal jhalmal jhalmal kore)

(gaura gadādhara guccha mala, jhalmal jhalmal jhalmal
kore)

(gadādharer ghaṭā mālā, jhalmal jhalmal jhalmal kore)

(gala deṣe vana-phuler-mālā, jhalmal jhalmal jhalmal
kore)

(jaya gaura gadādhara)



śiva-śuka-nārada preme gada-gada

bhakativinoda dekhe gorāra sampada (7)

(gaurara sampada sei to’ dekhe)

(gaurara pade prana sva peche, gaurara sampada sei to’
dekhe)

(gaura bine jane nāre, gaurara sampada sei to’ dekhe)

(nitāi-gaura hari bol)




The Upadeṣāvalī of Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī “Ācārya Kesarī*”



1. Bhagavat-bhakti is attained by viśrambha-sevā
(intimate service) to the lotus feet of Śrī Guru.

2. Honest service to Śrī Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇavas is
actual guru-sevā.

3. The aṅga of bhakti known as kīrtana is the best and
most complete limb of bhakti.

4. Only through the medium of kīrtana are the other
limbs of bhakti accomplished.

5. Renouncing bad association is actual solitude, and
performing bhajana in the company of sādhus and
Vaiṣṇavas is the actual meaning of solitary bhajana.

6. Preaching Hari-kathā always and everywhere is real
Hari-kīrtana.

7. To speak Hari-kathā always and everywhere or to be
absorbed in speaking about services related to Śrī Hari
is real silence.

                          342
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017


8. Performing Gaura-bhajana in the mood of rūpānuga is
the actual vipralambha-bhajana of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

9. Taking shelter of the feet of a genuine guru, one
should serve Hari.

10. One should never give pain to any living entity by
body, mind, or words.

11. One should maintain his life by honest means.

12. One should always remember that Śrī Bhagavān is one,
not many.

13. Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa only is Svayaṁ Bhagavān;
He is the possessor of all śakti and the origin of all
avatāras. Rendering service to Him is the primary duty
of all living entities; all other activities are
secondary.

14. Those people who consider that Bhagavān is formless
are atheists, and one should never associate with them.

15. Attaining prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the real ultimate
objective of the jīva.

16. The service of Kṛṣṇa which is performed for His
pleasure with a favorable attitude, which is devoid of
all other desires, which is not covered by jñāna and
karma, and which is performed by the body, mind, words,
and all of the senses, is our very life.



*Kesarī means ‘lion-like’




The Upadeśāvalī of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvati
Prabhupāda



1. “Paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam—supreme victory
to the congregational chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s names”—this is
the Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha’s sole object of worship.

2. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the viṣaya-vigraha or the object of
the devotee’s prema, is the sole enjoyer and all others
are to be enjoyed by Him.

3. Those who don’t perform hari-bhajana are ignorant and
murderers of their own souls.

4. The acceptance of Śrī Harināma and direct realization
of Bhagavān are one and the same.

5. Those who equate the demigods with Viṣṇu are unable
to serve Bhagavān.

6. Establishing a printing press to print devotional

                            343
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

books and preaching by organizing nāma-hāṭṭa programs
constitutes genuine service to Śrī Mayapura.

7. We are not doers of good or bad deeds, nor are we
scholars or illiterate. Carrying the shoes of Hari’s
pure devotees as our duty, we are initiates into the
mantra “kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hari.”

8. Preaching without proper conduct falls within the
category of karma, mundane activity. Without criticizing
the nature of others, one should correct one’s self—this
is my personal instruction.

9. Serving the Vrajavāsīs who felt great separation from
Kṛṣṇa when He left Vraja to reside in Mathurā is our
supreme constitutional occupation.

10. If we desire to follow an auspicious course in life,
then disregarding the theories of even countless people
we should hear instructions only from a transcendental
source.

11. Life as an animal, bird, insect, or any other of the
countless thousands of species is acceptable, but taking
shelter of deceit is thoroughly improper. Only an honest
person possesses real auspiciousness.

12. Simple-heartedness is synonymous with Vaiṣṇavism.
Servants of a paramahaṁsa Vaiṣṇava should be simple-
hearted, a quality which makes them the topmost
brāhmaṇas.

13. Helping to draw conditioned souls away from their
perverted attachment to the material energy is the
greatest compassion. If even one soul is rescued from
Mahāmāyā’s fortress, that compassionate act is
infinitely more benevolent than the construction of
unlimited hospitals.

14. We have not come to this world to be construction
workers; we are the bearers of Śrī Caitanyadeva’s
instructions.

15. We will not remain in this world for long, and by
profusely performing Hari-kīrtana, upon relinquishing
these material bodies we will experience the ultimate
reward of embodied life.

16. The foot-dust of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, the fulfiller of
Śrī Caitanyadeva’s inner desires, is our lives’ sole
desired object.

17. If I were to desist from lecturing about the
Absolute Truth due to being fearful that some listeners
may be displeased, I would be deviating from the path of
Vedic truth and accepting the path of untruth. I would
become one who is inimical to the Vedas, an atheist, and
would no longer possess faith in Bhagavān, the very
embodiment of truth.

18. Kṛṣṇa’s darśana can only be attained through the
medium of the ear as one hears Hari-kathā from pure
Vaiṣṇavas; there is no other way.


                          344
Gaudiya_Giti-Guccha.txt                        5/5/2017

19. Wherever Hari-kathā is being spoken is a holy place.

20. Proper śravaṇa, hearing, is accomplished through the
medium of kīrtana, and this will give one the good
opportunity to practice smaraṇa, remembrance. Then
internal experience of rendering direct service to the
aṣṭakālīya-līlā, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in each of
the eight parts of the day, becomes possible.

21. We should understand that the loud calling out of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names is bhakti.

22. Bhagavān will not accept anything which is offered
by a person who doesn’t chant Harināma one-hundred
thousand times daily.

23. By sincerely endeavoring to chant Harināma without
offences and remaining fixed in chanting constantly,
one’s offences will fade and pure Harināma will arise on
the tongue.

24. As mundane thoughts arise while taking Harināma, one
should not become discouraged. A secondary consequence
of taking Harināma is that these useless mundane
thoughts will gradually dissipate; therefore one should
not worry about this. By dedicating one’s mind, body,
and words to serving Śrī Nāma and continuing to chant
with great persistence, Śrī Nāma Prabhu will grant one
darśana of His supremely auspicious transcendental form.
And by continuing to chant until one’s anarthas are
fully eradicated, by the power of Śrī Nāma realization
of His form, qualities and pastimes will automatically
arise.




                          345
