Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017

Guru-devatātmā



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:    ★★★★★

Tags: Guru-devatātmā Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī

Guru-devatātmā Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmīttt



* * *




* * *




Guru-devatātmā

Accepting Sri Guru as One’s Life and Soul



Contents

Preface

More Intimate Than Our Soul

Today is Guru Day

What if a Guru is not Pure?

Even Kṛṣṇa Accepted a Guru

Śrī Guru — Heavier Than God

The Absolute Necessity of Second Initiation




Preface


Respected Reader,




                              1
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017

Every year, by the order of his śikṣā-guru, Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja travels two times around the world,
preaching the message of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and pure
love. Last winter, in early December of 2002, he began
his preaching tour in Murwillumbah, Australia. On the
last day of his stay in Murwillumbah, he requested that
the lectures he had given there on the subject of guru-
tattva, along with the short talks given by his
disciples during those lectures, be published as a
booklet. Then, a month later, in mid-January of 2003 in
Hilo, Hawaii, he gave two more lectures on the same
topic and requested that they be added.

While in Hilo, Śrīla Mahārāja held a special meeting
called an iṣṭagoṣṭhī (a discussion of spiritual subject
matters based on questions and answers). In that meeting
he addressed the doubt regarding the necessity of
receiving dīkṣā-mantras from the bona fide guru, and the
transcription of that meeting is presented as the last
chapter of this booklet.

We offer unlimited obeisances and gratitude to our most
worshipable gurudeva, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Prabhupāda, for first manifesting Kṛṣṇa consciousness in
the Western world. He has also manifested the Sanskrit
verses, English translations, our previous ācāryas’
commentaries, and his own Bhaktivedānta purports, to
Vedic literatures like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta. By his mercy, therefore, we were
able to reference all the scriptural quotes given in
Śrīla Mahārāja’s lectures.

Moreover, besides Śrīla Prabhupāda’s giving the Vedic
scriptures and their deep meanings to the English-
speaking world and also arranging for their translation
in over fifty foreign languages, he is their
personification. Śrī guru is the embodiment of all the
scriptures, and he is such a bona fide guru. Before
leaving the vision of this world in 1977, he requested
his intimate friend and śikṣā disciple, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja, to continue his mission.



Aspiring for the service of Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇava,



Syāmarāṇī dāsi




More Intimate Than Our Soul


I offer millions of obeisances unto the lotus feet of my
spiritual master, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and same
to my śikṣā-guru, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja.


                              2
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017

I remember a verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that was spoken
by Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi to Vasudeva, the father of Kṛṣṇa.1
This verse was then re-told by Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī to
Parīkṣit Mahārāja, who was cursed to die by the bite of
a snake-bird after seven days:



bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo ‘smṛtiḥ

tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ

bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.37)



Fear arises when a living entity misidentifies himself
as the material body because of absorption in the
external, illusory energy of the Lord, called māyā. When
the living entity thus turns away from the Supreme Lord,
he also forgets his own constitutional position as a
servant of the Lord. Therefore, an intelligent person
should engage unflinchingly in the unalloyed devotional
service of the Lord, under the guidance of a bona fide
spiritual master, whom he should accept as his
worshipable deity and as his very life and soul.



What are the causes of fear? Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī has
explained this. We all fear. Although everyone, in all
species of life, throughout all the material universes,
only wants peace of mind and happiness, everyone is full
of fear.

Happiness and peace of life follow us like a shadow. If
we want to take that shadow within our grasp, we will
find it to be intangible — with no substance. On the
other hand, when we proceed forward, turning away from
our shadow, that shadow will follow us. This is the
nature of shadows.

Perhaps all of you know the meaning of māyā (illusion)?
Māyā, in the form of economic development, sense
gratification and impersonal liberation, is like a
shadow. When we turn to her and try to enjoy sense
gratification, we find that sense gratification to have
no substance. In other words, the desire for material
happiness becomes the cause of pain and grief. There is
no happiness in the material world, only distress and
suffering, and this suffering is experienced as the
endless chain of birth and death. No one is happy to be
in māyā. On the other hand, if we progress towards
Kṛṣṇa, all material facility and liberation will follow
us.

We are part and parcel of the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, and
He is an ocean of ānanda, unlimited happiness and peace.
He is the reservoir of pure ānanda and, in fact He
Himself is ānanda. Because we are His parts and parcels,

                              3
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017

by our constitutional position, by nature, our bodies
are also made of pure ānanda. This refers to our
transcendental body, however, not our material body.



bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo ‘smṛtiḥ

tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ

bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā



Somehow we have departed from that Supreme Lord, the
ocean of rasa (transcendental taste) and ānanda, and now
we are entangled in the deluding potency called māyā.
Mā-yā. We are seeing that which is not actually a fact
to be a fact. Whatever we see or feel by our sensory
perception is māyā. When we first departed from Kṛṣṇa,
when we first forgot Him, māyā came at once and attacked
us. She defeated us and put us in her jail. What is that
jail? It is this body and mind. Actually there are two
jails, one within the other. This gross body is the
outer jail and the subtle body is the inner jail. We
have been suffering and fearing since time immemorial,
and we are never free from that.

Parīkṣit Mahārāja asked Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, “How can
we come out of this endless chain of birth and death?
How can we get free from māyā?” Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī
replied, “Tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ /
bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā.”

Being in māyā, we cannot become free from māyā at once
and go to the spititual realm of Goloka Vṛndāvana. This
is possible only by the help of Vaiṣṇavas, pure
devotees. By the association of Vaiṣṇavas we can have a
very pure guru — not an imitation guru but a sad-guru (a
self-realized guru). If we take shelter in his lotus
feet, he will take full charge of our lives. He will
take all kinds of responsibility for our lives and he
will teach how to do devotional service to Kṛṣṇa.

Guru-devatātmā. First, we must think that guru is our
ātmā, our life and soul. Being totally surrendered to
him, we must depend solely on him. Tan ābhajet. Tan
means the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa. If we serve Kṛṣṇa under
the guidance of sad-guru, then certainly, like magic, we
will be out of māyā. We will see that our transcendental
form has manifested, that we are serving Kṛṣṇa, and that
we are now bathing in the endless ocean of ānanda and
rasa. At that time, we will also be embodiments of
ānanda, and we will simultaneously be the enjoyers of
ānanda by serving.

Try to realize all these facts. It is not sufficient to
simply hear about this and tell others. We will have to
be established in this truth. We are in deep māyā, and
to the extent we are in māyā we are that far away from
Kṛṣṇa. Our only hope is the fact that Kṛṣṇa has sent
sad-guru and Vaiṣṇavas to this world. I realize this; I

                           4
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017

was a third-class bogus person, but my gurudeva picked
me up and engaged me in this transcendental service.

To give the happiness of direct service to the Divine
Couple Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is the mission of ancient
scriptures like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and great spiritual
masters like Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, our guru-varga (disciplic
succession), and especially, in Western countries,
parama-pujyapāda Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja —
who ordered me to also preach it.

I request you all to understand these eternal truths and
be established in them, and to also preach this mission
of the succession of spiritual masters, called guru-
paramparā, to others. If you are practicing but not
preaching, you are selfish. Do not be weak. Preach.

It is stated in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta: “sthāne sthitāḥ
śruti-gatāṁ tanu-vāṅ-manobhir.” If you are wearing the
saffron cloth of a renunciate (brahmacārī or sannyāsī),
do not marry and do not fall down. If you are gṛhastha
(a householder), then remain gṛhastha. But after you are
fifty years old, try to come out of gṛhastha life. Do
not engage your whole life in the gṛhastha āśrama. If
you can be a gṛhastha like Prahlāda Mahārāja or the
Pāṇḍavas, that is fine; but that is very rare.




Today is Guru Day


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: What is the meaning of the
verse I spoke about in this morning’s class?



bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo ‘smṛtiḥ

tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ

bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.37)



What is the meaning of the last line of this verse —
“bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā?”



Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja: In this verse it has been
said that one must accept śrī gurudeva, who is the non-
different manifestation of the Supreme Lord within this
world (sākṣāt-hari), and who is coming as an emissary of
the Supreme Lord to rescue the condition souls. Kṛṣṇa-
kṛpā śrī mūrti, the very personification of the mercy of
Kṛṣṇa, is coming to the conditioned soul to bring him

                              5
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017

back to the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. How should that soul
who is aspiring for freedom receive this pure
representative of Kṛṣṇa? He should receive him as his
most worshipable lord — just as one would worship Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Himself. Bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā means that
he will have one-pointed bhakti — one-pointed faith and
devotion — to the lotus feet of his guru. If he develops
this one-pointed devotion, he will also consider that
śrī guru is more dear to him than his own life.

By the mercy of śrī guru, Bhagavān gives His mercy.
“Yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto ‘pi — without that mercy of
the representative of the Supreme Lord, it is not
actually possible to attain His lotus feet.” If sad-guru
is not pleased, the conditioned soul remains within this
world.



[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] This is a very good
explanation. We should try not only to speak, but also
to follow. If a devotee is doing a great deal of
chanting, reading and glorifying Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but he is
not following his gurudeva, what will be the result?



[Śrīpāda Araṇya Mahārāja:] Śrīla Gurudeva is raising the
point that if a disciple is carefully engaged in
regulative devotional practices (sādhana) but he has no
faith in guru, what will be the result? It will be zero.
This has been described in many places in śāstra. Kṛṣṇa
Himself has said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.19.21):
“mad-bhakta-pūjābhyadhikā — the worship of My devotees
is better than worship of Me.” He also says, “That
person who says he is My devotee but who is not devoted
to My devotee, is not My devotee at all.” Kṛṣṇa rejects
that person.



yāha bhāgavata paḍa vaiṣṇavera sthāne

ekānta āśraya kara caitanya-caraṇe

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 5.131)



If you want to understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you must
approach a self-realized Vaiṣṇava and hear from him. You
can do this when you have completely taken shelter of
the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.



If you want to understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you must
surrender yourself unto the lotus feet of a bhakta-
bhāgavata (pure devotee).



naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu


                           6
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke

bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.2.18)



By regular attendance in classes on the Bhāgavatam and
by rendering of service to the pure devotee, all that is
troublesome to the heart is almost completely destroyed,
and loving service unto the Personality of Godhead, who
is praised with transcendental songs, is established as
an irrevocable fact.



If one wants to have all of the anarthas covering his
transcendental knowledge destroyed, then nityaṁ
bhāgavata-sevayā:



eka bhāgavata baḍa’bhāgavata-śāstra

āra bhāgavata’bhakta bhakti-rasa-pātra

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 1.99)



One of the bhāgavatas is the great scripture Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, and the other is the pure devotee absorbed
in the mellows of loving devotion.



dui bhāgavata dvārā diyā bhakti-rasa

tāṅhāra hṛdaye tāṅra preme haya vaśa

(ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 1.100)



Through the actions of these two bhāgavatas the Lord
instills the mellows of transcendental loving service
into the heart of a living being, and thus the Lord, in
the heart of His devotee, comes under the control of the
devotee’s love.



Only by the combined actions of the book bhāgavata
(scripture) and the pure devotee bhāgavata do the
mellows of bhakti-rasa enter someone’s heart.



nikuñja-yūno rati-keli-siddhyai

yā yālibhir yuktir apekṣaṇīyā

                             7
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017


tatrāti-dākṣyād ati-vallabhasya

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

(Śrī Gurvaṣṭakam 6)



Śrī gurudeva is always present with the sakhis, planning
the arrangements for the perfection of Yugala-kiśora’s
amorous pastimes (rati-keli) within the kuñjas of
Vṛndāvana. Because he is so expert in making these
tasteful arrangements for Their pleasure, he is very
dear to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I offer prayers unto his
lotus feet.



Kṛṣṇa is always feeling separation from Rādhika, and
Rādhika is feeling separation from Kṛṣṇa. How indebted
They feel to that personality who is so expert that she
can bring them together to meet! Even an ordinary
conditioned soul in this world gives his life and
surrenders at the lotus feet of that person who is very
dear. Similarly, that devotee who fulfills the innermost
heart’s desire of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa will automatically
become dear to Them. And if one surrenders to that pure
devotee’s lotus feet, then, through that pure Vaiṣṇava,
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa will shower Their mercy on him and
quickly bring him to Their lotus feet.

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has given the instruction
in his song Śrī Guru-caraṇa-padma:



guru-mukha-padma-vākya cittete kariyā aikya

āra nā kariha mane āśā



Here is the meaning of the words guru-devatātmā — one
should make his heart one with the words emanating from
the lotus mouth of a sad-guru.



śrī-guru-caraṇe rati, ei se uttama gati,

je prasāde pure sarva āśā



By having rati, spontaneous attachment of the heart, for
the lotus feet of his guru, a disciple will attain his
goal. Without the mercy of guru, no sādhana has any
strength or power at all. Therefore, the first aṅga
(limb) of bhakti, out of 64 aṅgas, is guru-pādāśraya
(taking shelter of the lotus feet of śrī guru).




                            8
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017

guru-pādāśraya, dīkṣā, gurura sevana

sad-dharma-śikṣā-pṛcchā, sādhu-mārgānugamana

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.115)



On the path of regulative devotional service, one must
observe the following items: (1) One must accept a bona
fide spiritual master. (2) One must accept initiation
from him. (3) One must serve him. (4) One must receive
instructions from the spiritual master and make
inquiries in order to learn devotional service. (5) One
must follow in the footsteps of the previous ācāryas and
follow the directions given by the spiritual master.



[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] Have you heard of Upamanyu?
His guru once told him, “Oh, you go out to graze cows
all day and you do not bring with you anything to eat,
and yet you are very healthy and fat. Why is that? Do
you drink milk from the cows’ udders?” Upamanyu replied,
“Yes I do.” His guru told him, “Don’t drink it anymore,”
but he did not tell him what he would be allowed to eat
or drink. During the next days, Upamanyu continued to go
out. After some days his guru said, “You still look very
fat. Are you drinking milk? What are you doing?”
Upamanyu told him, “I am only eating the foam that
accumulates on the mouth of the cows — nothing else.”
His guru then asked him, “Have I told you to eat that?
Don’t eat it.” Then, without Upamanyu asking what to eat
and without his gurudeva telling him what he would be
allowed to eat, gurudeva went away. His gurudeva was not
actually displeased with him. He was only acting
displeased in order to test his disciple’s obedience.

On the next day the cows returned without Upamanyu, and
his guru went out in search for him. He called out,
“Upamanyu, where are you? Where are you?” He heard a
sound from the well, and that sound was the voice of
Upamanyu calling, “Gurudeva, I am here in this well.”
Gurudeva asked, “What are you doing in there?” Upamanyu
replied, “Gurudeva, you told me not to take milk or
foam. So I became so hungry that I drank the milk of a
leaf of an ekwan plant — and then I discovered that it
was poisonous. By drinking it, I became totally blind.”
Now showing his pleasure, Upamanyu’s guru said, “You
have followed my instructions!” He took him out of the
well and blessed him by saying, “All the knowledge of
the Vedas will now enter your heart.” Then, at once, all
the scriptures (like Śrutis, Vedas, Upaniṣads) and all
varieties of knowledge were inspired in his heart.

In the history of Aruṇi, and also in the history of
Sudāmā and Kṛṣṇa, we find similar miraculous results as
the fruit of surrender to śrī gurudeva. There is no
possibility of attaining bhakti if we do not totally
follow our gurudeva.

Today, the day that begins our preaching tour, is like
“Guru Day.”


                           9
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017




What if a Guru is not Pure?




tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.3.21)



Any person who is seriously desirous of achieving real
happiness must seek out a bona fide spiritual master and
take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of
a spiritual master is that he must have realized the
conclusion of the scriptures by deliberation and
arguments and thus be able to convince others of these
conclusions. Such great personalities, who have taken
complete shelter of the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside
all material considerations, are to be understood as
bona fide spiritual masters.



Suppose a person unfortunately took initiation from an
unqualified guru who was not on the stage of a mahā-
bhāgavata (fully self-realized soul). That guru was not
realized in the established truths. The word śabde means
śāstras like the Vedas, Upaniṣads, and so on. It also
means the holy name. Pare means the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa.
That guru had no realization of Kṛṣṇa or His names or
His glories as told in śāstra, and he was only on the
level of kaniṣṭha-adhikārī — but still he thought he was
guru. He had many worldly desires, such as the desire
for name, fame and wealth, and someone unfortunately
took harināma and dīkṣā from him.2

Do the verses that glorify the qualifications of guru
apply to that guru or not? Should the disciple obey that
guru with the attitude of surrender ordered by all the
śāstras? Should he follow that guru totally or not? Can
a person acquire pure cow milk from a male donkey? Can a
person get sweet mangos from a thorn tree? What is the
disciple’s duty towards that kind of guru?



[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Maharaja:] We must consider that the
presence of uttama-adhikārīs (those approaching prema-
bhakti or those already in prema-bhakti), madhyama-
uttama-adhikārīs (those approaching the stage of bhava),
and even madhyama-madhyama-adhikārīs (those at the stage
of asakti) are very rare in this world. It is very rare,
therefore, to have a guru of this caliber. What should

                              10
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017

we do under these circumstances? We will have to take a
guru. If a guru is not śābde pare ca niṣṇātam, if he has
not realized the established truths delineated in the
Vedas, Upaniṣads and other śāstras, but he has very
strong faith in his pure guru and is sincerely following
him, then, even if he is a madhyama-adhikārī, do not
reject him. If he is always serving his own mahā-
bhāgavata guru and is obedient both internally and
externally to him, then do not reject him. We can give
up our guru only with the consideration given by Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī in his Hari-bhakti-vilāsa:



avaiṣṇava-mukhodgīrṇaṁ

pūtaṁ hari-kathāmṛtam

śravaṇaṁ naiva kartavyaṁ

sarpocchiṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ



One should not hear anything about Kṛṣṇa from a non-
Vaiṣṇava. Milk touched by the lips of a serpent has
poisonous effects; similarly, talks about Kṛṣṇa given by
a non-Vaiṣṇava are also poisonous.



If a guru is not serving his own gurudeva, if he has
left the process given by him, and, his guru is not
satisfied by his behavior — only in that case can we
reject him. However, if the guru is a madhyama-adhikārī
and sincere, if he is very obedient and following the
footsteps of his guru, then he will gradually become
uttama-adhikārī. So we should not reject him. At the
same time, if he is not perfect and thus cannot remove
all our doubts about Kṛṣṇa consciousness, what should we
do?

We should offer praṇāma to him and ask his permission to
have the association of a mahā-bhāgavata devotee: A
disciple may ask, “May I go to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī?” or
“May I go to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī?” or, “May I go to a
high class of Vaiṣṇava?” If the guru says, “No, you
cannot go,” then give him up.3 On the other hand, if he
says, “Certainly you can go, and I will also come,” then
he is a real guru. A guru who sends his disciple to a
superior guru for instruction may also be an uttama-
mahā-bhāgavata, as there are various stages of uttama-
mahā-bhāgavata, and that guru is certainly not to be
rejected. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura was a disciple of
Śrīla Lokanātha Gosvāmī, but he took permission from him
to take shelter of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrīla
Śyāmānanda Prabhu also took permission from Śrī Hṛdaya-
caitanya for that same shelter of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī.

There are three levels of devotees who can act as sad-
guru, and they are: (1) bhagavat-pārṣada-deha-prāpta,
(2) nirdhūta-kāśayā and (3) mūrcchita kāśayā.4

This human life is very rare, so do not waste your time.

                            11
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017

Try to follow all these principles, and gradually you
will develop your Kṛṣṇa consciousness.




Even Kṛṣṇa Accepted a Guru


Everywhere in Vedānta, in the Upaniṣads, and especially
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, sad-guru has been glorified. The
holy name is transcendental; this is true. It is written
in śāstra, and we hear from so many persons, that we
should chant harināma. But someone may say, “I have read
here and there that we should chant harināma; so I am
chanting. What, then, is the need of a guru, who is like
an agent, a broker, or a mediator? Ajāmila easily went
to Vaikuṇṭha, the Lord’s transcendental abode of
opulence, without knowing the glories of harināma in the
beginning. We can chant harināma without accepting a
guru.”

If one is chanting without being under the guidance of a
guru, what will be the result? Such a person can only
chant aparādha (offenses to the name), except in a rare
case, such as in the case of Ajāmila. It is stated in
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 19.151):



brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja



According to their karma, all living entities are
wandering throughout the entire universe. Some of them
are being elevated to the upper planetary systems, and
some are going down into the lower planetary systems.
Out of many millions of wandering living entities, one
who is very fortunate gets an opportunity to associate
with a bona fide spiritual master by the grace of Kṛṣṇa.
By the mercy of both Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master,
such a person receives the seed of the creeper of
devotional service.



Bhakti develops from the seed of bhakti given by guru-
rupi-kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa in the form of guru. Kṛṣṇa does not
directly give that seed to anyone. He either gives it
through śrī guru, or He Himself becomes guru and then
gives it.

Without accepting guru, the name one chants is not
transcendental. That name will fulfill your worldly
desires, even up to mukti (liberation), but not more
than this. Ajāmila had no guru at first. He named his
son Nārāyaṇa, one of the Lord’s names, at the nāma-
saṁskāra, the ritualistic ceremony in which babies are
given their name. By chance, because he lived in the
Vedic culture, he named his son Nārāyaṇa, and by his

                             12
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017

recitation of that name he began his chanting of nāma-
ābhāsa (the clearing stage of chanting). That was his
first nāma-ābhāsa, and after that he would daily call
out, “O Nārāyaṇa, come on, come on!” By continually
doing this, his nāma-ābhāsa continued.

Later, when Ajāmila was dying, he saw the ferocious
forms of the Yamadūtas (constables of the god of death).
Being very fearful, the name of his son automatically
came to his throat and he called out, “Nārāyaṇa!” At
that time, at the moment of death, the Supreme Lord
Nārāyaṇa sent His four messengers, the Viṣṇudūtas, and
Ajāmila heard their dialogue as they drove out the
Yamadūtas. He heard the holy name and glorification of
the name of Nārāyaṇa from the Viṣṇudūtas, and thus he
received the seed of śuddha-nāma (the pure name) from
them. By this he received the seed of bhakti, his life
returned, and he thought, “The holy name that I heard
from the four Viṣṇudūtas is so powerful! And the glory
of that name is so wonderful! Now that I have received
this mantra, I must give up this wife, that wife, all my
children, and all my possessions.” He left everything
and went to Haridwar, where he bathed in the Ganges, sat
down on its bank, began chanting, and eventually began
to chant śuddha-nāma.

After some time the Viṣṇudūtas again came to Ajāmila,
and this time they said, “Come with us and sit in this
chariot-airplane.” By now Ajāmila had reached the stages
of bhava, and then prema. By continuously chanting, “oṁ
namo nārāyaṇāya,” he attained vaikuṇṭha-rati. His rati
(prema) was not vṛndāvana-rati, not mādhurya-mayi prema
(loving Godhead with intimacy), but rather it was
aiśvarya-mayi prema (love of Godhead in awe and
reverence, with knowledge of His opulence).

Ajāmila told the Viṣṇudūtas, “When you drove away the
Yamadūtas, I wanted to speak with you and touch your
feet, but you disappeared. Now you have appeared again
and you are telling me to go with you. How did this come
to be?”

The Viṣṇudūtas replied, “We gave you the seed of the
pure name and we gave you the seed of bhakti-latā (the
creeper of devotion). By chanting and regularly bathing
in the Ganges you are now purified. You have attained
vaikuṇṭha-rati and are qualified to come to Vaikuṇṭha.”
Then they took him there.

By the time the Viṣṇudūtas appeared to Ajāmila for the
second time, he had become totally free from all
material desires. In the case of Dhruva Mahārāja,
however, although he was a disciple of Nārada, he still
had a slight attachment to his mother. It was for this
reason that he could not go to the Vaikuṇṭha that is
situated beyond the sum total of all the material
universes, called mahat-tattva. Rather, he went to
Dhruvaloka, a spiritual planet situated near Rāma-priya
Vaikuṇṭha, within this universe.

Vālmīki Ṛṣi was also a disciple of Nārada. Prior to
meeting Nārada, he had been a dacoit. He had killed
millions of brāhmaṇas (the learned and priestly class)
and tapasvīs (ascetics) and had stolen their wealth.

                           13
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017

When Nārada Ṛṣi met him, he preached to him about the
glories of Bhagavān, the Supreme Lord, and at last he
said, “You should sit here. I am giving you the seed of
the pure name. You should chant ëRāma’.” Vālmīki was not
qualified to chant the name of Rāma and, understanding
this, Nārada told him, “If you cannot chant the name of
Rāma, then chant Ma-ra, ma-ra, ma-ra (death, death,
death).” Vālmīki replied, “Oh, I can do that,” and he
began chanting Mara, mara. Since he was a disciple of
Nārada, he was able to get such a concession.

What became of Vālmīki? After many thousands of years
his chanting of “mara” turned into “Rāma”, and then he
became qualified to write rāma-līlā, the pastimes of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form of Rāma. He
saw that līlā in his samādhi trance and thus, as Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam was written by Śrī Vyāsadeva in samādhi-
bhāṣya, trance language, in the same way Rāmāyaṇa was
written by Śrī Vālmīki. Vālmīki saw everything about
rāma-līlā in his trance, even before Rāma had actually
exhibited His pastimes, and then he wrote down those
pastimes in his Śrī Vālmīki Rāmāyaṇa.

We should understand that without guru we are bound to
have material attachment and we are bound to commit
offenses to the holy name (nāma-aparādha). If the seed
of bhakti and one’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa (sambandha-
jñāna) are not given by a pure guru, there can be no
śabda-brahma, experience of transcendental sound (sound
coming from the transcendental realm). Acceptance and
surrender to a sad-guru is therefore essential.

Although Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He
also accepted a guru. The gopis once teased Him by
saying, “You have no guru?” Kṛṣṇa replied, “Who has said
this? My gurudeva is Bhāguri Ṛṣi.”

It is generally accepted that Kṛṣṇa’s guru was Sāndīpani
Muni, but actually Sāndīpani Muni was like a teacher. He
taught Kṛṣṇa the 64 arts, and therefore he was like a
schoolteacher. Kṛṣṇa received rādhā-mantra from Bhāguri
Ṛṣi, and therefore it is Bhāguri Ṛṣi who is really the
guru of Kṛṣṇa. In this world, when Kṛṣṇa or any of His
incarnations descend, they accept a guru. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, who is Kṛṣṇa Himself, also accepted a guru.
He accepted harināma and gopal-mantra from Īśvara
Purīpāda, and He Himself said to Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī
when asked why he engaged in harināma-saṅkīrtana instead
of studying Vedānta:



prabhu kahe’śuna, śrīpāda, ihāra kāraṇa

guru more mūrkha dekhi’ karila śāsana

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 7.71)



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied to Prakāśānanda
Sarasvatī, “My dear sir, kindly hear the reason. My
spiritual master considered Me a fool, and therefore he
chastised Me.”

                           14
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017




mūrkha tumi, tomāra nāhika vedāntādhikāra

ëkṛṣṇa-mantra’ japa sadā,’ei mantra-sāra

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 7.72)



“ëYou are a fool,’ he said. ëYou are not qualified to
study Vedānta philosophy, and therefore You must always
chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, which is the essence of
all mantras, or Vedic hymns.’”



Caitanya Mahāprabhu quoted his spiritual master as
saying, “You have no qualification to enter Vedānta
philosophy. You are foolish and ignorant, and you should
therefore simply chant harināma.”



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 17.21)



In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy, the only means of
deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There
is no other way. There is no other way. There is no
other way.



His gurudeva gave Him this mantra:



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



Why did Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu not utter the name
of His sannyāsa-guru, Keśava Bhāratī? After all,
acceptance of sannyāsa, the renounced order of life, is
not a small thing. It is not less than harināma or dīkṣā
initiation. The reason is that Caitanya Mahāprabhu
Himself had first spoken the sannyāsa-mantra into the
ear of Keśava Bhāratī, and after that Śrī Keśava Bhāratī
spoke it into Mahāprabhu’s ear.

Therefore, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu only told

                            15
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017

Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī the name of Śrī Īśvara Purī, and
He said that the mantra given by Śrī Īśvara Purī had
made Him like a madman. In His human-like pastimes, if
these mantras had not been given by Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda,
the result could not be as it was. Mahāprabhu would not
have developed His relationship with Kṛṣṇa and He would
not have tasted such prema. We should try to know all
these truths.




Śrī Guru — Heavier Than God


Very quickly, in a couple of years, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja preached throughout the world — in the
mountains, on ocean islands, in the North, East, South
and West. I see his glories everywhere.

Although Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja actually came to this
world as a representative of our guru-paramparā, some
people want him to be the only guru. They want that
there be only one guru — for the past, present and
future. They want to deny our guru-paramparā. This is
very bad; and we should not follow this. Rather, we
should know what is guru-tattva.

Guru means “heavy”, more so than anyone else in this
world — even more than Kṛṣṇa Himself. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa
may come to that guru and take his footdust — it may be.
It is written in Śrī Gīta-govinda by Śrīla Jayadeva
Gosvāmī that Kṛṣṇa said to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, “Dehī-pada-
pallavam-udharam — please be merciful and place Your
lotus feet on My head. Be pleased with Me.” Kṛṣṇa
sometimes also says this to the gopīs who serve Śrīmatī
Rādhikā more than they serve Him. He may pray to them,
“Please place your footdust on My head.” This is guru-
tattva.

In other words, all the pure gurus in the disciplic line
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, in their spiritually perfected
forms, are gopī maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The
subject of guru-tattva is the essence of all our bhakti
literature. This subject is very heavy, and therefore
you should hear it with the core of your hearts. We can
only worship Kṛṣṇa after we have worshipped guru.

All of us in this world have turned away from Kṛṣṇa.
Whether we accept it or not, it is true. Although we are
greatly suffering, we do not realize it. Why not? We
have drunk such a large quantity of the alcohol of māyā
that we have become completely mad; and in this madness
we think ourselves very happy. You should know that one
day you will have to give up your bodies and all that
you have collected in this world. One day you will
surely have to be old. Old age is very eagerly waiting
to embrace you, and none of you will escape it. A
devotee of the caliber of Śrī Nārada Muni can escape
this māyā and its presentation of old age, but you are
not like Nārada Muni. You will have to suffer if you are
not careful.


                              16
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017

It is stated in the Vedas:



yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

(Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.23)



Only unto those great souls who have implicit faith in
both the Lord and the spiritual master are all the
imports of Vedic knowledge automatically revealed.



This instruction has been given since ancient times:
“Yasya deve parā bhaktir.” Those who are suffering and
who want to be happy in this world and in the next,
especially those living in the present age of quarrel
and hypocrisy called Kali-yuga, should serve Kṛṣṇa, the
Supreme Lord. And, not less than Him, such persons must
serve the bona fide gurudeva. Here in this verse the
word para-bhakti has been used, and we should therefore
know its meaning:



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.1.11)



The cultivation of activities which are meant
exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or, in other
words, the uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
performed through all endeavors of the body, mind and
speech, and through the expression of various spiritual
sentiments (bhāvas), which is not covered by jñāna and
karma, and which is devoid of all desires other than the
aspiration to bring happiness to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is called
uttama-bhakti, pure devotional service.

Parā-bhakti is the continuous, uninterrupted flow of the
activities performed by our body, mind, words and moods
(bhāvas), which are executed only for the benefit of
Kṛṣṇa. Such activities are not disturbed or covered by
jñāna (mental speculation or knowledge leading to
impersonal liberation) and karma (the desire to enjoy
the fruits of ones activities), and it is performed
under the guidance of guru-tattva. If there is a lack of

                             17
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017

the above symptoms in a devotee’s activities but bhakti
is there to some degree, we can still call it bhakti —
but not parā-bhakti.

The Vedas tell us that parā-bhakti is certainly to be
applied to Kṛṣṇa, but first it must be applied to guru.
If one has no guru, all his devotional activities will
be like zero; only worldly fruits will come. If one
thinks, “I am already chanting, remembering and
performing arcanā (regulative worship of the Deity),”
but he is not truly initiated by a bona fide guru, the
fruit of his activities will only be worldly.
Intoxicated by sense enjoyment such a person may think
himself happy, but he will not be actually happy. It is
therefore stated in śāstra:



brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 19.151)



According to their karma, all living entities are
wandering throughout the entire universe. Some of them
are being elevated to the upper planetary systems, and
some are going down into the lower planetary systems.
Out of many millions of wandering living entities, one
who is very fortunate gets an opportunity to associate
with a bona fide spiritual master by the grace of Kṛṣṇa.
By the mercy of both Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual master,
such a person receives the seed of the creeper of
devotional service.



What is the meaning of guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde? This
generally means that one can attain the bhakti-latā-bīja
— the seed of parā-bhakti — by the combined mercy of
guru and Kṛṣṇa. In this connection, however, there is
another meaning. Here the meaning is that the bona fide
guru is a manifestation of Kṛṣṇa Himself. Kṛṣṇa does not
come to us, but the guru may come, as Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja came and traveled
everywhere. You should realize that the mercy of Kṛṣṇa
first manifests as the mercy of guru. From the bona fide
guru, who is Kṛṣṇa Himself as His manifestation (āśrayā-
vigraha), we can have the seed of bhakti. What is the
the seed of bhakti? It is kṛṣṇa-sevā-vāsanā, the desire
to serve Kṛṣṇa. This desire will come only from
gurudeva, the bona fide Vaiṣṇava, and it does not matter
whether he is acting as a śikṣā-guru or a dīkṣā-guru. He
may act as a śikṣā-guru in the case of a disciple who is
initiated by a bona fide guru but he cannot avail his
śikṣā. The seed of the bhakti creeper comes from this
high class of gurudeva, and that is why śāstra states:



yasya deve parā bhaktir


                           18
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ



One can know who is Kṛṣṇa only from gurudeva, and if a
guru is not bona fide, Kṛṣṇa cannot be known. Among the
64 limbs of bhakti described in Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu, the first four are in relation to śrī gurudeva.
The first is guru-pādāśraya, which means acceptance of
the shelter of the lotus feet of gurudeva, and that
shelter is taken through hearing. That is harināma
initiation in the real sense. Those who take shelter of
such a guru can progress quickly in bhakti. After guru-
pādāśraya, there is dīkṣā and śikṣā. Dīkṣā means
initiation and śikṣā means instruction. The disciple
will begin to understand his gurudeva’s instructions,
and then he will try to follow them. You should take
initiation from that guru, but be very careful. If a
guru is bona fide and you have some doubt in his
character or teachings, Kṛṣṇa will never accept you.



yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo

yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto ‘pi

dhyāyaṁ stuvaṁs tasya yaśas tri-sandhyaṁ

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam

(Śrī Gurvāṣṭakam 8)



Only by the mercy of śrī gurudeva can one receive the
mercy of Kṛṣṇa; without his grace the living entities
cannot make any advancement or be delivered. I meditate
three times a day on the glories of śrī gurudeva and
recite stava-stuti (prayers) unto his lotus feet.



ajñaś cāśraddadhānaś ca

saṁśayātmā vinaśyati

nāyaṁ loko ‘sti na paro

na sukhaṁ saṁśayātmanaḥ

(Bhagavad-gītā 4.40)



Ignorant and faithless persons who doubt the revealed
scriptures do not attain God consciousness; they fall
down. For the doubting soul there is happiness neither
in this world nor in the next.


                             19
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017



Suppose a guru is bona fide, and he is preaching and
serving his gurudeva. If anyone doubts him and thinks,
“My gurudeva is an ordinary man and he does not know
this and that,” or “I know better than him, at least in
ordinary matters,” that person falls down from Kṛṣṇa
consciousness and no one will be able to save him. We
should be very careful not to associate with such a
person. Also, do not associate with anyone who
associates with that type of wretched person. Try to
behave as you would behave regarding the passing of
stool. If we can pass stool easily, we are very happy.
We feel great relief if there is a motion. If the stool
remains inside the body, we will be restless. We will
not be able to do bhakti or anything else. Similarly,
you will surely have to give up bad association for your
entire life. If you want bhakti, if you want to become
Kṛṣṇa conscious, then do not mix with those persons who
doubt a guru who is bona fide, who is serving his
gurudeva, and who is preaching throughout the world.
Parama-pujyapāda Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja had
many thousands of disciples, but so many of them have
completely given up their Kṛṣṇa consciousness due to
their doubts.

You may have heard the names of Droṇācārya and Ekalavya.
They were both present in this world 5000 years ago, at
the time of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes here. Ekalavya went to
Droṇācārya and told him, “I accept you as my guru.”
Droṇācārya replied, “I knew you would be coming to me
even before you came. I know your heart and pulse; you
are very much against pure bhaktas and therefore I will
not teach you archery.” Ekalavya then said, “I have
accepted you as my guru, so I must learn something about
archery from you.” Droṇācārya again refused and said, “I
cannot give lessons to you. If you learn archery, you
will become a burden to the entire world.”

Still determined, Ekalavya went to the forest and made a
clay statue of Droṇācārya. He offered praṇāma to that
statue and, repeatedly taking the footdust of that
statue, he began to practice archery with great faith.
Practicing archery while regularly performing arcanā and
offering flowers to Droṇācārya, Ekalavya became a
master. Then, one day, Droṇācārya went to the forest and
saw Ekalavya, and he became astonished to see how he had
learned such a high class of archery. When Ekalavya saw
Droṇācārya, he fell at his lotus feet and told him,
“What I have learned, I have learned from you.”
Droṇācārya then told Ekalavya, “If you have really
learned archery from me, then I want some guru-dakṣiṇā.”
Ekalavya said, “Whatever you wish, I am prepared to
give. I am also prepared to give my life if you want
that.” Droṇācārya replied, “I want your right-hand
thumb.” You would not be able to do this if you were
asked to do so by your gurudeva, but Ekalavya did it
immediately.

Ekalavya was still able to shoot with his remaining four
fingers, but what was the result? During the Mahābhārata
battle he wanted to fight with Kṛṣṇa and kill Him;
therefore, Kṛṣṇa took His Sudarśana cakra and very
easily cut off his head.

                           20
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017


In this connection, the śraddhā, faith, of Ekalavya is
compared to a clay pot. If one places a clay pot in
fire, it will crack. The śraddhā of Ekalavya was like
that clay. He was selfish and wanted to ruin the
devotees, and because of this ulterior motive his
śraddhā in making and worshipping a statue of Droṇācārya
was really not śraddhā at all. Our śraddhā should not be
like that of Ekalavya; it should be like that of Arjuna.
Always remember this and do not associate with Ekalavya.
Some ignorant devotees, who are not actually devotees,
have named their sons or disciples “Ekalavya”. We should
always be careful not to have the misconception that he
was a good disciple.

Someone may ask, “If a guru is not an uttama-adhikārī,
how can he help his disciples? He may speak and behave
incorrectly.” The reply to such a doubt is that if a
guru is in the final stage of madhyama-adhikārī, if he
is madhyama-uttama, if he is very sincere and
continually serving his uttama-adhikārī gurudeva, and if
he has no worldly desires, he will very soon become an
uttama-adhikārī. Mahāprabhu confirmed this truth at the
Ratha-yātrā festival while speaking to the inhabitants
of Kulīna-grāma. Do not doubt this.

Kṛṣṇa has said in the Bhagavad-gītā (9.23):



ye ‘py anya-devatā-bhaktā

yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ

te ‘pi mām eva kaunteya

yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam



Those who are devotees of other gods and who worship
them with faith actually worship only Me, O son of
Kuntī, but they do so in a wrong way.



Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna that if a person worships a demigod
with strong faith in order to fulfill his worldly
desires, thinking, “Surely he will fulfill my desire,”
that person is actually worshiping Kṛṣṇa Himself, but in
the wrong way. Someone may directly touch his nose and
someone else may touch it by making his hand and finger
go all the way around his head before it reaches his
nose. Similarly, that person’s desires can be fulfilled
by Kṛṣṇa alone, whether they are fulfilled by directly
asking Him or by getting them fulfilled in a roundabout
way by supplicating the demigods. It is actually Kṛṣṇa
who gives their benedictions. The devatās are not
powerful; they are unable to give any benediction.

In a similar way, a guru may be madhyama-uttama, a
madyama-adhikārī in the final stage; he may not yet be
siddha (a perfect, self-realized soul) like Śrī Nārada
Muni, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and others. In that case,

                            21
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017

if he is a sincere devotee and if a disciple follows him
with deep faith, who will give the fruit of the
disciple’s worship? A madhyama-adhikārī cannot give it.
If one is an uttama-adhikārī like Nārada Ṛṣi or Śrī
Śukadeva Gosvāmī or Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, he can give it
at once, but a madhyama-adhikārī cannot. The madhyama-
adhikārīguru will tell hari-kathā and engage his
disciples in such a way that they will advance in
bhakti. What will be the result? If one has very deep
faith in that guru, Kṛṣṇa Himself will surely give the
fruit, and that fruit will be transcendental. Kṛṣṇa will
give that disciple the fruit of the association and
shelter of an uttama-adhikārī guru.5 To a devotee
initiated by a madhyama-adhikārī guru and who really
desires to attain the highest goal, Kṛṣṇa gives the
association and mercy of an uttama guru who can bless
the disciple with that goal. Try to understand this. It
is not very easy to understand, but try. Do not have any
doubt about this.

Uttama-adhikārī gurus are not easily available; they are
very rare in this world. Moreover, even if they are
available, most people will not be able to recognize
them. For example, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī was naked, and
Śrī Vamsidāsa Bābājī put fish bones and other abominable
things outside his bhajana-sthālī. You would not be able
to know that Śrīla Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja is

an uttama mahā-bhāgavata. If a madhyama-uttama guru who
is under the guidance of an uttama-adhikārī guru will
tell you, or an uttama-adhikārī playing the role of a
devotee in the stage of madhyama-adhikārī will tell you,
then you will be able to know. We should be very, very
careful about this. Do not have any doubt in that kind
of guru. If one is madhyama-uttama, he can help so much
by his direction. The advanced madhyama-adhikārī will
very soon come to the stage of rati (bhāva), like
Bharata Mahārāja and Ambarīṣa Mahārāja. If a person has
doubts in him, do not associate with that person. His
association should be given up as one gives up stool
after passing it.




The Absolute Necessity of Second Initiation


[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] In my classes I have been
explaining the meaning of bhakti and I have explained
how we can gradually achieve it, beginning from the
smallest fraction of bhakti called śraddhā. We discussed
many points, among which was the necessity for guru-
pādāśraya. In the meantime, a topic has arisen that I
want to discuss and clarify. You should very carefully
and seriously hear this important subject matter. First,
Śrīpād Padmanābha Mahārāja will present the argument;
then I will reply to it.

[Śrīpāda Padmanābha Mahārāja:] There is a question
concerning the relationship between gāyatrī-mantra
(dīkṣā) and harināma initiation. Some persons have
presented quotes from Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī

                           22
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017

Prabhupāda and Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja in
order to present the idea, based upon their own
understanding of these quotes, that harināma is complete
and sufficient in itself for the conditioned soul, and
that initiation into the gāyatrī-mantra is not actually
required. I will read their quotations and then Śrīla
Mahārāja will give the clear understanding. First of all
they quote Śrīla Prabhupāda in a room conversation in
1973, in Paris, where he says, “Chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mahā-mantra. Then, as he practices, he becomes more
purified. Then second initiation — gāyatrī-mantra. The
first initiation, according to Jīva Gosvāmī, that is
sufficient. Chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, that is
sufficient. But still, to purify them more, the second
initiation, gāyatrī, is given.”

That is one quote. Then they quote Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka
Śrīdhara Mahārāja in his book Śrī Guru and His Grace.
There he says, “We accept the mantra only to help the
nāma-bhajana, the worship of the holy name. Otherwise it
may not be necessary at all. It has been judged in such
a way. The name alone can do everything for a person; it
is full and complete. The gāyatrī-mantra helps us to do
away with the aparādhas (offenses) and the ābhāsa, or
hazy conception. The gāyatrī-mantra comes to help us
only so far.”

With these two quotations, some persons have attempted
to support their statement that it is not actually
completely essential or necessary for conditioned souls
to accept the gāyatrī-mantra — dīkṣā — because harināma
is sufficient. They have also suggested that Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is saying something contrary to Śrīla
Prabhupāda and Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja. I am also
reading the two statements they have quoted from Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. The first is from his book, Going
Beyond Vaikuṇṭha: “Without the gopāla-mantra and the
kāma-gāyatrī, will our sādhana be complete with only the
nāma-saṅkīrtana? No, because by nāma-saṅkīrtana alone we
will not be able to chant śuddha-nāma, the pure name of
Kṛṣṇa.” The second quotation they cite from a lecture
given by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja on the topic of Śrī
Bhajana-rahasya: “Everything is there, but don’t think
that we can realize all this by chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma
alone. We must chant harināma and gāyatrī-mantra as
well. If we want full understanding and realization of
what is in the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, we must also chant the
gāyatrī-mantras.”

Now we will hear from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja who will
kindly give the proper philosophical conclusion of these
points, so that everyone can understand clearly the
position of gāyatrī-mantra initiation and harināma
initiation, and their relationship.



[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] I think you have all
understood the argument. Now you should try very
carefully to understand the reply so that you can
reconcile all these statements. Someone has presented
the idea that the acceptance of dīkṣā is not essential
and has thus indirectly indicated the verse:


                           23
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017



dīkṣā-puraścaryā-vidhi apekṣā nā kare

jihvā-sparśe ā-caṇḍāla sabāre uddhāre

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 15.108)

One does not have to undergo initiation or execute the
activities required before initiation. One simply has to
vibrate the holy name with his lips. Thus, even a man in
the lowest class (caṇḍāla) can be delivered.



The holy name is sufficient. The holy name is very
powerful and can fulfill all desires. The name will even
give vraja-prema. What, then, is the need of taking
initiation? The paper has quoted my statement, along
with those of prapujya-caraṇa Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara
Mahārāja and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja; so, I
want to reconcile all the statements.

It is true that dīkṣā-puraścaryā (initiation and the
purificatory activities performed before initiation) is
not needed in all circumstances; but we should know
something about the actual meaning of this verse. Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda wrote a
book of rules and regulations in Deity worship called
Arcana-dīpikā. There he has explained that harināma is
bhāgavata-svarūpa, the actual form of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā —
and for this reason it is stated in Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka:
“paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam.” By chanting and
remembering Kṛṣṇa’s names, all kinds of perfection —
like vraja-prema and even rādhā-dāsya (becoming a
maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā) — can be attained. In
the first stage, however, when a devotee is uttering the
holy name, he is full with many aparādhas and other
anarthas such as laya (sleep), vikṣepa (distraction),
apratipatti (indifference or disinterest in spiritual
topics) and so on. It is guaranteed that such a person
cannot utter the pure name; rather, his chanting will be
nāma-aparādha. Chanting the pure name is only possible
after dīkṣā-saṁskāra.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains dīkṣā in his Bhakti-
sandarbha (283):



divyaṁ jñānaṁ yato dadyāt kuryāt pāpasya saṅkṣayam

tasmāt dīkṣeti sā proktā deśikais tattva-kovidaiḥ



Dīkṣā is the process by which one can awaken his
transcendental knowledge and vanquish all reactions
caused by sinful activity. A person expert in the study
of the revealed scriptures knows this process as dīkṣā.
(Quoted in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 15.108,
purport)



                           24
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017


The gāyatrī-mantra gives all kinds of divya-jñāna,
transcendental knowledge, including the knowledge of
kṛṣṇa-tattva and jīva-tattva, and it also gives a
relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Nāma alone will not give this
relation to the person filled with anarthas. All of our
ācāryas, from top to bottom, have stated that in order
to purify us from our sinful reactions and to clear
offenses (anartha-nivṛtti) so that we can develop the
ability to chant the pure name, we must accept dīkṣā-
vidhāna (the process of initiation). Dī — kṣā. Dī means
divya-jñāna, or realized knowledge of our relationship
with Kṛṣṇa. Kṣā is the washing away of all sins,
aparādhas, and other impurities. For this, dīkṣā-vidhāna
is essential. Without dīkṣā-saṁskāra, one’s relationship
with Kṛṣṇa (sambandha-jñāna) cannot manifest and one
cannot chant śuddha-nāma. It is essential to accept
dīkṣā.

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has written in Śrī Hari-bhakti-
vilāsa:



yathā kāñcanatāṁ yāt

kāṁsyaṁ rasa-vidhānataḥ

tathā dīkṣā-vidhānena

dvijatvaṁ jāyate nṛṇām



As bell metal (a mixture of copper and tin) becomes gold
by mixing with mercury, similarly, by the process of
dīkṣā initiation, a person becomes a brāhmaṇa.

Bell metal turns into gold by the help of the element
mercury. Similarly, by this element, the process of
dīkṣā, our chanting of the holy name will become pure;
otherwise it is not possible.

If there is no necessity to accept dīkṣā-mantra, why did
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda take
second initiation from Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja, and why did he give dīkṣā initiation to all of
his disciples? Parama-pūjyapāda Śrīla Śrīdhara Gosvāmī
Mahārāja also took dīkṣā from him. If there is no
necessity, why did Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura give dīkṣā initiation, and why did his
disciples accept it?

Not only that, Brahmā received kāma-gāyatrī and gopāla-
mantra from Kṛṣṇa Himself. Brahmā then gave the dīkṣā-
mantra to Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi, and Nārada gave it to so many
disciples. Nārada not only gave harināma to Dhruva
Mahārāja — he gave him dīkṣā by the mantra: oṁ namo
bhagavate vāsudevāya. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu took
initiation from Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda, who first gave Him
harināma. Then, to purify that chanting of nāma, he gave
Him gopāla-mantra. Gopāla-mantra is transcendental and
ever-existing, and it gives a relationship with Kṛṣṇa as
Gopījana-vallabha. We should consider all this evidence.

                           25
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017


All the ācāryas in our guru-paramparā have accepted
dīkṣā mantras. Can those who say that harināma is
sufficient for conditioned souls name any ācārya in our
guru-paramparā who has not taken dīkṣā initiation? Śrīla
Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and the
Six Gosvāmīs took second initiation. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Prabhupāda also took it. Why did they take dīkṣā
initiation if it is not essential? You should know the
gravity of this truth. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī Gadādhara
Paṇḍita, Śrī Īśvara Purī and Śrī Mādhavendra Purī have
all taken dīkṣā. Why, then, should we not take it? Why
is it not essential? If it is not essential, then why
did Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī write about it in his Śrī Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa? Why did Śrī Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī also
write about it? Did he say it was useless? Those who say
that dīkṣā is not essential will not be able to answer
these questions in hundreds and millions of years.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu took initiation. He is the Lord
of lords — Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa combined — and yet He went to
Gayā and took initiation. He vividly explained this fact
in a gathering of sannyāsīs in Kāśī, when those
sannyāsīs asked Him, “O, you are a very young and
qualified sannyāsī. Why do you not hear Vedānta? Why do
you engage in singing and dancing and rolling on the
ground? A sannyāsī should not dance and do all these
things.”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied by telling them of the
order of His guru, Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda. Mahāprabhu said,
“Guru mora mūrkha dekhi. My Guru Mahārāja told me that
because I am foolish and unintelligent, I am not
qualified to study Vedānta. He said that instead I
should always chant Hare Kṛṣṇa and I should remember
this verse:



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 17.21)



In this Age of Kali there is no other means, no other
means, no other means for self-realization than chanting
the holy name, chanting the holy name, chanting the holy
name of Lord Hari.



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu not only took harināma from His
gurudeva. He also took second initiation through the
gopāla-mantra. In our paramparā, in order to purify
one’s chanting and to give the chanter a relationship

                            26
Guru-devatatma.txt                               5/5/2017

with Kṛṣṇa, who has kindly taken the form of His holy
name, the gopāla-mantra is given along with harināma.
Before the time of Mahāprabhu, only gopāla-mantra was
given. Later, after He manifested pastimes, Śrīla
Dhyānacandra Gosvāmī and Śrīla Gopāla-guru Gosvāmī came
to this world and gave the regulations we now follow.
They gave brahma-gāyatrī, guru-mantra, guru-gāyatrī,
gaura-mantra, gaura-gāyatrī, kṛṣṇa-mantra (gopāla-
mantra) and finally kāma-gāyatrī. This is the process
followed in our sampradāya as begun by Śrīla Gopāla-Guru
Gosvāmī, who is a disciple of Vakreśvara Paṇḍita, who is
an associate of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu quoted His gurudeva saying, “kṛṣṇa-
mantra japa sadā — ei mantra-sāra. You must always chant
the holy name of Kṛṣṇa. This is the essence of all
mantras, or Vedic hymns.”

kṛṣṇa-mantra haite habe saṁsāra-mocana

kṛṣṇa-nāma haite pābe kṛṣṇera caraṇa

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 7.73)



Simply by chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa one can obtain
freedom from material existence. Indeed, simply by
chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra one will be able to see
the lotus feet of the Lord.



The offenseless chanting of the holy name does not
depend on the initiation process. But that name must be
the pure name — and how will it become so? It can only
be revealed as pure through that dīkṣā process;
otherwise it is not possible. It is not that the holy
name is not pure, but if a person is not a pure devotee
he cannot chant the pure name. He can only chant
syllables that sound like the name. He can only chant
offenses to the name (nāma-aparādha) or a semblance of
the name (nāma-ābhāsa).

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu chanted the pure name.
Therefore, He was able to tell His gurudeva:



kibā mantra dilā, gosāñi, kibā tāra bala

japite japite mantra karila pāgala

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 7.81)



My dear lord, what kind of mantra have you given Me? I
have become mad simply by chanting this mahā-mantra!



Caitanya Mahāprabhu told the sannyāsīs, “You ask why I
dance and sing and roll on the ground. Here is the

                           27
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017

reason: When My gurudeva initiated me, he gave me both
the harināma and gopāla-mantra.” Then He said, “Japite
japite mantra.” If He had only received harināma, the
mahā-mantra, He would not have said the word “mantra”.
Mantra especially refers to gopāla-mantra and kāma-
gāyatrī. He first received harināma and then gopāla-
mantra. “Japite japite mantra karila pāgala. — and this
made Me mad. Kṛṣṇa-nāma and mantra — meaning the mahā-
mantra and gopāla mantra — made Me like a madman.”

For those who always remember and meditate on the
gopāla-mantra and kāma-gāyatrī, by the power of the
mantra, rati (bhāva-bhakti) will at once enter their
hearts.

It has been written in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-
līlā 4.192):



dīkṣā-kāle bhakta kare ātma-samarpaṇa

sei-kāle kṛṣṇa tāre kare ātma-sama



At the time of initiation, when a devotee fully
surrenders unto the service of the Lord, Kṛṣṇa accepts
him to be as good as Himself. First initiation is called
harināma initiation only, and the second initiation is
called dīkṣā. Ātma-samarpaṇa — at the time of dīkṣā the
disciple totally surrenders unto the feet of his
gurudeva. Sei-kāle — at that time Kṛṣṇa gives the
shelter of His lotus feet, and He makes that disciple
ātma-sama, very near and dear to Him.



According to the Vaiṣṇava regulative principles, one
must be initiated as a brāhmaṇa. As quoted in Śrī Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa (2.6) from the Viṣṇu-yāmala, Lord Śaṅkara
said to his wife Pārvatī:



adīkṣitasya vāmoru kṛtaṁ sarvaṁ nirarthakam

paśu-yonim avāpnoti dīkṣā-virahito janaḥ



O Vamaru — O beautiful Pārvatī — regarding those who
have not taken dīkṣā, all their devotional activities,
such as sādhana, bhajana and pūjā, have all gone in
vain. They are all useless. Such persons who are not
properly initiated must again enter the many animal
species.



It is stated in Padyāvalī, a book compiled by Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, that harināma can give everything, including
kṛṣṇa-premā, simply by touching the tongue.


                           28
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017



ākṛṣṭiḥ kṛta-cetasāṁ sumanasām uccāṭanaṁ cāṁhasām

ācaṇḍālam amūka-loka-sulabho vaśyaś ca mukti-śriyaḥ

no dīkṣāṁ na ca sat-kriyāṁ na ca puraścaryāṁ manāg
īkṣate

mantro ‘yaṁ rasanā-spṛg eva phalati śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmātmakaḥ

The holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa is an attractive feature for
many saintly, liberal people. It is the annihilator of
all sinful reactions and is so powerful that, save for
the dumb who cannot chant it, it is readily available to
everyone, including the lowest type of man, the caṇḍāla.
The holy name of Kṛṣṇa is the controller of the opulence
of liberation, and it is identical with Kṛṣṇa. When a
person simply chants the holy name with his tongue,
immediate effects are produced. Chanting the holy name
does not depend on initiation, pious activities or the
puraścaryā regulative principles generally observed
before initiation.The holy name does not wait for any of
these activities. It is self-sufficient. (Quoted in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 15.110)



But can this occur if one’s chanting is not pure? This
is the question that has been raised. Can this occur
without dīkṣā? In the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (17.4—5, 7) it
is stated:



vinā yena na siddhaḥ syān

mantro varṣa-śatair api

kṛtena yena labhate

sādhako vāñchitaṁ phalam



puraścaraṇa-sampanno

mantro hi phala-dhāyakaḥ

ataḥ puraṣkriyāṁ kuryāt

mantra-vit siddhi-kaṅkṣayā



puraṣkriyā hi mantrāṇāṁ

pradhānaṁ vīryam ucyate

vīrya-hīno yathā dehī

sarva-karmasu na kṣamaḥ

puraścaraṇa-hīno hi

                             29
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017


tathā mantraḥ prakīrtitaḥ



Without performing the puraścaryā activities, one cannot
become perfect even by chanting this mantra for hundreds
of years. But one who has undergone the puraścaryā-vidhi
process can attain success very easily. If one wishes to
perfect his initiation, he must first undergo the
puraścaryā activities. The puraścaryā process is the
life force by which one is successful in chanting the
mantra. Without the life force, one cannot do anything;
similarly, without the life force of puraścaryā-vidhi,
no mantra can be perfected. (Quoted in Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s purport to Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-
līlā 15.108)



Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has quoted a verse in order to
further dissolve any misunderstanding in this regard. In
his Bhakti-sandarbha (283—84), he describes the
importance of deity worship and dīkṣā initiation as
follows:



avasyakat āvaśyakatvaṁ nāsti, tad vināpi
śaraṇāpattyādīnām ekatareṇāpi puruṣārtha-siddher
abhihitatvāt, tathāpi śrī-nāradādi-vartmānusaradbhiḥ
śrī-bhagavatā saha sambandha-viśeṣaṁ dīkṣā-vidhānena
śrī-guru-caraṇa-sampāditaṁ cikīrṣadbhiḥ kṛtāyāṁ dīkṣāyām
arcanam avaśyaṁ kriyetaiva



yadyapi svarūpato nāsti, tathāpi prāyaḥ svabhāvato
dehādi-sambandhena kadarya-śīlānāṁ vikṣipta-cittānāṁ
janānāṁ tat-tat-saṅkocī-karaṇāya

śrīmad-ṛṣi-prabhṛtibhir atrārcana-mārge kvacit kvacit
kācit kācin

maryādā sthāpitāsti.



It is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam’s opinion that the process of
deity worship is not actually necessary, just as the
specific prescriptions of the Pañcarātra and other
scriptures do not have to be followed. The Bhāgavatam
enjoins that even without practicing deity worship one
can achieve the complete success of human life by any of
the other devotional processes, such as simply offering
oneself at the Lord’s feet for protection. Nonetheless,
Vaiṣṇavas, following the path of Śrī Nārada and his
successors, endeavor to establish a personal
relationship with the Lord by receiving the grace of a
bona fide spiritual master through initiation, and in
this tradition the devotees are obliged at the time of
initiation to begin engaging in deity worship.



                            30
Guru-devatatma.txt                              5/5/2017


Although deity worship is not essential, the material
conditioning of most candidates for devotional service
requires that they engage in this activity. When we
consider their bodily and mental conditions, we find
that the character of such candidates is impure and
their minds are agitated. Therefore, to rectify this
material conditioning, the great sage Nārada and others
have at different times recommended various kinds of
regulations for deity worship. (Quoted in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 15.108 purport)



Simply by the tongue touching the kṛṣṇa-nāma, that holy
name gives all kinds of perfection, including kṛṣṇa-
dāsya and rādhā-dāsya. But one should note Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī’s very clear commentary to this verse and take
it to heart for continual remembrance. In his Bhakti-
sandarbha (283), he has written:



dvijānām anupetānāṁ svakarmādhyayanādiṣu

yathādhikāro nāstīha syāc copanayanād anu

tathātrādīkṣitānāṁ tu mantra-devārcanādiṣu

nādhikāro ‘sty ataḥ kuryād ātmānaṁ śiva-saṁstutam



Even though born in a brāhmaṇa family, one cannot engage
in Vedic rituals without being initiated and having a
sacred thread. Although born in a brāhmaṇa family, one
becomes a brāhmaṇa only after initiation and the sacred
thread ceremony. Unless one is initiated as a brāhmaṇa,
one cannot worship the holy name properly. (Quoted in
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 15.108)6



It is true that simply by touching the tongue kṛṣṇa-nāma
can give everything. But the material tongue, the tongue
of a conditioned soul, cannot touch the transcendental
holy name.



ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.234)



With the material senses one cannot understand the
transcendental holy name of the Lord or His form,

                              31
Guru-devatatma.txt                               5/5/2017

activities and pastimes. But when one actually engages
in devotional service, utilizing the tongue, the Lord is
revealed.



Śrī Nārada Muni and other previous ācāryas, like Brahmā,
Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanātana and Sanat-kumāra, have all
taken dīkṣā. One receives dīkṣā, then performs sādhana-
bhajana, and worships his iṣṭadeva (personal deity),
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has written that
without dīkṣā there will be no relationship with Kṛṣṇa —
neither dāsya, sākhya, vātsalya, nor mādhurya. It will
never be possible without dīkṣā. In our sampradāya,
sambandha-jñāna comes only by uttering “gopījana-
vallabhāya” in the gopāla-mantra; otherwise it cannot
come.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written an
explanation of this same verse. Therein he vividly
explains that one may have given up all kinds of sādhana
and pious activities and may be chanting and remembering
the holy names of Bhagavān — he may have determined that
his iṣṭa-deva is Kṛṣṇa — still, if he has not taken
initiation from a Vaiṣṇava guru, thinking that it is not
essential, he can never achieve Kṛṣṇa. The only good
result he achieves is that he will not go to hell. He
cannot achieve the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, in any life,
until he is properly initiated. In a future life, by the
fruit of his previous activities of bhajana, he will
take birth in a very religious family and there he will
have sādhu-saṅga, guru-pādāśraya, and then dīkṣā. At
that time, he will make solid advancement in bhakti.
This is the only way.

Also, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has written in the
first verse of his Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā:



gurau goṣṭhe goṣṭālayiṣu sujane bhūsura-gaṇe

sva-mantre śrī-nāmni vraja-nava-yuva-dvandva-śaraṇe

sadā dambhaṁ hitvā kuru ratim apūrvām atitarā-

maye svāntar bhrātaś caṭubhir abhiyāce dhṛta-padaḥ



O my dear brother; my foolish mind! Taking hold of your
feet, I humbly pray to you with sweet words. Please give
up all pride and quickly develop sublime and incessant
rati for śrī gurudeva, Śrī Vraja-dhāma, the residents of
Vraja, the Vaiṣṇavas, the brāhmaṇas, my dīkṣā-mantras,
the holy names of the Supreme Lord, and the shelter of
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, the eternally youthful divine
couple of Vraja.



Why has he said “mantra” if dīkṣā initiation is not
necessary? Why has he not said only “śrī nāmni”? What is
sva-mantra? There is some difference between mantra and

                           32
Guru-devatatma.txt                             5/5/2017

harināma, and that is why he has told his mind: “You
should give up your false pride and try to develop
sublime and unprecedented attachment for both. Take
shelter of nāma and mantra, and then your life will be
successful.” So there are two things — not one. His
gurudeva gave him mantra — and that is dīkṣā.



Now kindly reconcile all these points.



Gaura-premānande!



Table of Contents

Preface

More Intimate Than Our Soul

Today is Guru Day

What if a Guru is not Pure?

Even Kṛṣṇa Accepted a Guru

Śrī Guru — Heavier Than God

The Absolute Necessity of Second Initiation




Table of Contents

Preface

More Intimate Than Our Soul

Today is Guru Day

What if a Guru is not Pure?

Even Kṛṣṇa Accepted a Guru

Śrī Guru — Heavier Than God

The Absolute Necessity of Second Initiation




                              33
