Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

Happiness in a Fool's Paradise

SRI SRIMAD BHAKTIVEDANTA NARAYANA MAHARAJA



CHAPTER ONE - PURE LOVE AND AFFECTION

CHAPTER TWO - MY MISSION

CHAPTER THREE - SUDAMA BRAHMANA




CHAPTER ONE - PURE LOVE AND AFFECTION




THE ORIGINAL MESSAGE

I’m very happy to be travelling and preaching in the
Western countries, but I have not come to give anything
new. I am simply following Srila Bhaktivedanta Svami
Maharaja, and giving the same thing that he came to the
West to give. Svami Maharaja is my bosom friend and
instructing guru. He also did not come to this world to
give anything new; rather, he has simply given what he
received from his Gurudeva and from all the teachers in
our disciplic succession, which goes back to Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is actually the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Sri Krishna Himself. However, He
came in the form of His own devotee to teach us the
process of transcendental devotional service, by which
we can develop pure love and affection for Him.

WE CANNOT FIND HAPPINESS IN THIS WORLD

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and all the teachers in His line
want us to be happy. Everyone wants to be happy, but
generally we can only find a very little happiness and
affection in this world, and even then it is mixed with
sorrows and suffering.

Why is it that we are unhappy, even though we have so
many possessions? We should consider this. Napoleon was
not a street beggar, and neither was President Kennedy.
Princess Diana was also not a street beggar; she was not
at all ugly, foolish, or ignorant. On the contrary, she
had name, fame, beauty and everything one could desire,
and she was married to Charles, but she was still not
happy.

Why is it that even people who seem to have everything
are unhappy, in spite of their wealth and opulence? We
should think about this very seriously. If we don’t, we
are no better than animals. You have heard of Mussolini.
His political power made him quite a giant, and Hitler
was more than a giant, but they were not happy.


                           1
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

We should reflect on the way that we are living at
present, and look into the future, asking ourselves,
“Will I be happy in the future, if I continue doing what
I am doing now, and following the process that I am
following now?” When we ask ourselves this question, we
will see that we are going in the same direction as
those people have gone. They were all unhappy, and if we
go in that direction, we will also be unhappy.

There are many very rich people — for example presidents
and prime ministers — who are unhappy, even though they
have plenty of opulence, and facility for enjoyment. One
day, they, too, will become old and die, and they will
lose everything that they have in this world.

Nowadays we have become very advanced in material life,
from the kitchen department to medical science. We have
produced many wonderful inventions, especially in the
areas of communication, transportation and medicine. If
a limb or an organ is damaged, we can change it for
another. A dead man’s eyes can be removed and given to a
blind person, so that he can see. Surgeons can even
replace a defective heart with a new one. Nonetheless,
we still have to become old, and we still have to die.

As far as the advancement of material science is
concerned, America is at the forefront, but are
Americans happy? If they are, why are they all
quarrelling with each other? Why do so many of them
commit suicide? We should see that material advancement
cannot make us happy.

OLD AGE WILL MARRY US BY FORCE

We don’t want to be old, and we don’t want our hair to
become white. We don’t want our eyesight to become
worse; and we certainly don’t want to become blind. We
want to remain young and very beautiful forever, but
after some time we will be forced to become old.

Generally, men do not want to marry women who are old
and no longer beautiful. Old age is ugly, and who wants
to marry someone who is ugly?

No one wants to marry Old Age, but she will force us to
marry her, whether we want to or not. Old Age will take
away your teeth, and you’ll have to use false teeth
instead. We can make some artificial arrangement to make
our white hair black, and our teeth beautiful. In the
end, though, we’ll have so many wrinkles, like all other
old people.

You’ll have to marry Old Age and become old. Perhaps you
won’t be able to walk. Finally, many people will come
and help you go to the last resting place of the body:
to the cemetery or the crematorium. In India, thousands
of people take the dead body to the crematorium, and
there they burn it to ashes. Other people bury dead
bodies; in that case, worms and insects eat some of the
body, and the rest rots. If your body is not burned or
buried, many wild dogs, jackals and hogs may come and
quarrel over it: “Oh, that’s my piece. Why did you take
it?” Then the body will become stool.


                           2
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

Ultimately, the body is bound to rot, or to become ashes
or stool. This is the truth about the body, to which we
are so attached. The body will die and disappear
forever, but we don’t want to think that we will die and
disappear forever.

WE ARE REFUGEES HERE

We should consider whether in fact we are this body, or
the soul within the body. It is a fundamental truth that
there is all the difference in the world between our
real self, which is the soul, and this body. Knowing
this, we have to be detached from this body, and from
worldly, lusty desires. We should also inquire where the
soul has come from.

We are parts and parcel of God, of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. This material world is not our
homeland; it is a place for refugees. We have come to
this world as refugees, and one day we’ll have to give
it up at a moment’s notice. Then where will we go?

WE NEED PURE LOVE AND AFFECTION

Modern scientists have discovered nuclear weapons, and
they are continuing with their research. They want to
discover weapons of destruction that are so powerful
that the whole world can be finished in a moment. But
this is not progress and advancement. Where is the love
and affection between husband and wife? Where is the
love and affection between father and children? Where is
the love between one country and another? Why do we have
to have such complicated and difficult systems with
passports and visas? Why? I often come and go between
India and different countries in the world. My only
business is to teach people about Krishna consciousness,
but the officials make it so difficult. Why?

Inventions and the advancement of material science are
bringing the different parts of the world much closer to
each other. Unfortunately, they are also creating many
problems. The main problem is that love and affection is
disappearing from everyone’s heart. That is why everyone
is unhappy. That is why they quarrel amongst themselves,
and want to control each other.

People are obviously not happy in their married life, or
in their life outside the home. If their standard of
happiness has advanced so much, why do they change wives
three, four, twelve, or even twenty times, like dogs
changing their mates? Why?

Everyone wants peace and happiness in their lives, but I
don’t think that the advancement of material science has
actually made any one happy. Happiness really depends on
love. We cannot find happiness without prema, or love
and affection. This is our real necessity: happiness and
love. We want pure happiness, and pure love and
affection, but we can’t find them here.

Nevertheless, they do exist.

We are trying to find happiness by developing impure
love and affection for imperfect personalities. The

                           3
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

Vedic literatures tell us that we can only be happy by
developing pure love and affection for the supremely
pure personality, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Throughout the Vedas and Upanisads we read that we are
parts and parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krishna. Our constitutional nature is to serve the
Supreme Personality of Godhead with love and affection.
Unfortunately we have forgotten this, and that is why we
are bound by maya in this material world. Maya has
imprisoned us, and she is giving us the sorrows and
sufferings of life: birth, death, old age, disease, and
so on. This is just so that we will understand that we
cannot be happy in this world. We cannot become happy by
making material arrangements, or by trying to fulfill
material desires, or by collecting material possessions.
We can only be happy in this world and the next by
serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna. We
should chant and remember His holy names and glories.

GENERATOR, OPERATOR AND DESTROYER

We have to develop affection for the Supreme Personality
of Godhead who has created this world. He has created it
and brought it into being; He is supporting it; and when
this world becomes old, it goes back to Him.

What is the significance of the word God?

G stands for Generator, the one who creates this world.

O stands for Operator, the one who is maintaining and
supporting this whole world. Without this support, the
whole world would have no basis, and would cease to
exist.

D stands for Destroyer.

ETERNAL, AUSPICIOUS AND BEAUTIFUL

God is satyamsivam sundaram. Satyam means that He does
not die or take birth. He is eternal. God is one, not
many. All the scriptures in our ancient Vedic tradition
say that Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
although He also has many other names. God is sundaram,
very beautiful. There is no one as beautiful as Krishna.
His form is eternally youthful, like that of a very
beautiful young boy. His body curves elegantly in three
places — His ankles, His waist and His neck. He smiles
and plays on His flute, and His transcendental body has
a most alluring fragrance. He attracts everyone in the
spiritual world — including His beloved cows —and He
attracts everyone in this world as well.

Everyone likes beautiful things, but we cannot love a
beautiful man if he has some poison in him. God must
therefore be sivam, auspicious. Krishna has all
auspicious qualities in full. That means that He has
infinite power, and besides being almighty, he is also
supremely merciful.

LOVING RELATIONSHIP WITH KRISHNA

Krishna is satyam, eternal; sivam, very merciful; and

                           4
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

sundaram, very beautiful. Everything is in Krishna, and
that is why He can fulfill all kinds of desires. You may
know of Nrsimhadeva. Nrsimha Bhagavan is another form of
Krishna, and He is also God; He has a head like a lion,
and He is very powerful and dangerous, but He is not as
beautiful as Krishna. Rama, Lord Ramacandra, is very
beautiful, but He cannot fulfill all desires.

Jesus Christ is powerful, and he will protect us like a
father or mother, but we cannot play with him like a
sakha, an intimate friend, and we cannot relate to him
as we would to a husband. Nrsimha Bhagavan protects
everyone, but He cannot be like a friend, because He is
so dangerous.

Krishna is the only Personality in whom we can find
everything. His beauty and His mercy are unparalleled;
He is omnipotent and omniscient; and He has all the good
qualities.

He will relate to us according to our own inner heart’s
desire. We can be like His servant or His intimate
friend. We can care for Him in a parental mood, and we
can even have the mood of His beloved.

If you have a little affection for Krishna, He can
fulfill whatever wishes or desires you may have.

He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the origin of
all other forms of Godhead, and He can give what even
Rama cannot. If we have just a little love and affection
for Krishna, we can be so happy, for all time. We can be
happy in this world, and we can be happy in our next
birth as well, and birth after birth. Even if we have
liberation, affection for Krishna will make us happy.

CAITANYA MAHAPRABHU’S MISSION

We should develop an affectionate relationship with
Krishna, who is the embodiment of love and affection.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to this world to teach us this
[and to tell us that the best way to love Krishna is to
follow the gopis of Vraja]. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is
Krishna Himself, and He came because He is causelessly
merciful. He loves everyone in this world, because we
are all parts and parcels of Krishna. He came to give
love and affection for Krishna.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to this world to bring us
closer to Krishna, and to wean us away from worldly
affairs, worldly enjoyment, worldly false ego and from
the false happiness of this world. He gives us eternal
bliss, and eternal love and affection, so that we can be
happy and peaceful. And it is not possible unless we
have what He has come to give.

Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to this world and gave a new
message by which everyone could be happy. We can know
all this by reading Sri Caitanya-caritamrta. He gave the
advanced philosophy of prema to very elevated devotees.
He preached in a simple way for people who were not so
advanced, and while He was traveling through the forest
towards Vrindavana, He even gave divine love to tigers,
bears, elephants and other animals.

                           5
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017


HAPPINESS BY CHANTING THE HOLY NAME

If you want to be happy, and to have love and affection
for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you should chant
Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare,
Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Then you
will be eternally happy. There is no other means.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu taught us this verse from the
ancient scriptures:

harernama harer nama, harer nama eva kevalam kalau nasty
eva nasty eva, nasty eva gatir anyatha

“In this Kali-yuga, the age of quarrel and hypocrisy,
one should simply chant the holy name, chant the holy
name, chant the holy name. There is no other, no other
way, no other way.”

We have come to the Western countries only to give the
same message that Caitanya Mahaprabhu came to give. We
are giving it in brief, and in a very simple way,
because the message of love and affection is so deep.

To understand this profound philosophy and to put it
into practice, people must first chant Hare Krishna,
Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. At first they can
understand this message in a simple way. Then they will
gradually understand it more deeply and broadly as they
develop through the steady practice of Krishna
consciousness, and especially by chanting the holy
names. There is a systematic process of development from
faith, to firm devotion, taste for devotional practice,
transcendental attachment to Sri Krishna and His
associates, ecstatic moods and then full transcendental
love and affection for Krishna (prema). This is Caitanya
Mahaprabhu’s method of developing love of Godhead
through the process of congregational chanting of the
holy names.




CHAPTER TWO - MY MISSION




INTRODUCTION

In this section, Srila Narayana Maharaja explains to his
disciples what his mission is. To understand what he is
saying here, we have to know something about the
disciplic succession.

The particular group of Vaisnavas to which Srila
Narayana Maharaja belongs are called Gaudiya Vaisnavas.
The Gaudiya Vaisnavas are in The disciplic succession
from an extraordinary devotee called Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu — or Lord Caitanya — who appeared a little
more than 500 years ago. Lord Caitanya inspired and
renewed the practice and teaching of Krishna

                           6
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

consciousness, and there is irrefutable evidence that He
is actually none other than the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Sri Krishna Himself. Sri Krishna appeared as
His own devotee to teach us the ultimate conclusions of
Krishna consciousness by His own example. Vaisnavas who
follow Lord Caitanya’s teachings and practice, and who
worship Him as Krishna Himself, are called Gaudiya
Vaisiavas.

All Vaisnavas aspire for pure devotional service to
Krishna or Visnu. The speciality of the Gaudiya
Vaisnavas is their emphasis on the service moods of
Vraja (or Vrindavana). The residents of Vraja are so
deeply in love with Krishna, that they have no desire to
worship Him in awe and reverence. Instead, they worship
His most attractive feature informally, with pure
transcendental love and affection.

OUR MISSION

Someone was asking me, “What is your mission? What have
you come here to give?” My mission is the same as the
mission of Lord Caitanya and the teachers in His
disciplic succession. Our mission is to give love and
affection to all living beings, regardless of their
caste, creed and qualification.

The topmost perfection of love and affection is the
service mood that the residents of Vraja have towards
Krishna. We are giving this most excellent love and
affection to those who want it, and who are qualified
for it. But you should recognize that if anyone has real
love and affection for Krishna, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, he must also have love and affection for all
living beings. He will not kill any animal, or eat fish,
meat, or eggs. He will not harm any living creature at
all; he will not even crush the grass unnecessarily. One
who has love and affection for Krishna will try to
please Him by showing love and affection to all living
entities.

LOVE, AFFECTION AND MERCY

How can we have genuine love and affection for Krishna,
if we do not show mercy to His parts and parcels?
Sometimes, when I go out for a walk in the West, I
think, “I should not come this way.” Why? Because the
calves and cows grazing in the fields run away in fear,
trembling when they see me. They are thinking, “These
people have no mercy on us. They are keeping us in jail,
and after some time, they will take us to the slaughter-
house and kill us.”

How can anyone think they have the right to attack
animals and kill them? If people are not merciful to
animals, how will Krishna be merciful to them?

We see that there are prominent religious leaders and
yet they are responsible for the deaths of very small
calves, so that they can eat their flesh. Those small
calves will cry out at the time of death. Where will
that crying go? Where will it go? Does Krishna have no
ears?


                            7
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

Such religious leaders are thinking that they are very
elevated religious persons and servants of God, but what
do the calves think about that? We realize that such
people have no love and affection for the animals. Yet
the animals are also sons and daughters of Krishna, and
eternal servants of Krishna. That is why we chant
Krishna’s holy name to them

— Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna.

NO DUPLICITY

A guru must be a pure devotee with no self interest, who
is not duplicitous, and who is full of this kind of
mercy. My mission is to give love and affection for
Krishna. When people have that, they will automatically
have love and affection for all living beings. You
should all come to this stage. This is my mission.

My disciples should listen to these instructions. Try to
develop these qualities of love & affection, and obtain
prema for Krishna. Then try to be merciful to everyone,
and give this message to all by distributing
transcendental literature, and by chanting the holy name
in public places. Everyone — including ignorant people,
and even the calves and other innocent animals — should
hear Krishna’s holy name and be benefited. Even if they
have no desire for it, the holy name will purify them in
any case. Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said, “Perform the
chanting of the holy name in public, and don’t worry if
people laugh at you, or insult you. Don’t worry what
they do.”

Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has established the movement
for preaching Krishna consciousness to people where they
live. You should try to follow his instructions and
example. Develop love and affection for Krishna, and
help others to develop it as well. If you are really
doing this, I will be pleased, and Krishna will be
pleased. Then you will really be disciples, otherwise
not.

Gaura-premanande! Haribol!




CHAPTER THREE - SUDAMA BRAHMANA




INTRODUCTION

Modern material civilization has failed to produce
happiness. The pastime of Sudama Brahmana teaches us
that though one may be in an impoverished position, he
can nevertheless be happy by practicing spiritual
principles which are the exact opposite of those that we
learn in material society. This pastime also illustrates
that Krishna is fully capable of supplying the needs of
His surrendered devotees even beyond our wildest
imaginations.

                             8
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017


KRISHNA IS VERY MERCIFUL

Krishna is so powerful. He is the ocean of the essence
of all bliss in transcendental relationships in pure
love and affection. He is the God of all Gods. He is
even the root cause of other forms of Godhead such as
Rama, Nrsingha and all the other incarnations.

At the same time, Krishna is very kind and merciful. If
anyone offers Him even just a leaf, fruit or water, He
will accept it. One may be so poor that he has nothing
to offer Krishna, but Krishna says, “Don’t be hopeless.
You can offer me a leaf.” This really means a leaf from
the tulasi plant, which is so dear to Krishna. But if
you don’t have a tulasi leaf, you can offer any leaf or
even a bud from a tree.

If you don’t have that, then you can even just offer
some grass — no harm. Or you can offer Krishna some
water, which is available everywhere free of charge. And
when you make the offering with love, Krishna will
think, “Oh! I cannot repay this offering of love.” He is
so merciful. If you give Him such a very little thing,
He will think, “He has given Me so much.”

In Srimad Bhagavatam, we find a delightful pastime,
which shows that Krishna is so grateful and merciful
that no one else in the whole of the creation can be
compared with Him.

THE BRAHMANA AND HIS WIFE

Once there was a brahmana named Sudama. A brahmana is
someone who is spiritually realised, and who knows
Brahman, the spiritual basis of the whole creation.
Sudama brahmana was also a Vaisnava, which means that He
worshipped Krishna as the Supreme Brahman, the source
and basis of Brahman. Krishna is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, but He appeared on Earth about 5,000 years
ago, and performed pastimes to defeat the demons and to
delight His devotees. Sudama knew this, and was always
engaged in chanting and remembering Krishna’s names and
glories, He lived near Dvaraka, Krishna’s wonderful
city, which was full of inconceivable, mystical
opulence.

Sudama was married and his wife was very chaste.
Brahmanas are expected to devote their lives to
spiritual development, and to live very simply, by
begging if necessary. Sudama and his wife were very
poor, but he never took much trouble to go here and
there begging. He was satisfied with what he got.

Some people think, “I am so poor, so I should do
something to make more money, but Sudama was satisfied
in himself. He had realized the soul and Supersoul, the
expansion of the Supreme Lord who resides in every atom,
and in the heart of every living entity. He was also a
most elevated devotee of Sri Krishna. That is why he was
never worried about making money, even though he was
poor and had to support himself and his wife. He was
always absorbed in chanting and remembering. Sometimes
he used to go and beg, but he would only go to two or

                            9
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

three doors and then come back.

Sudama did not have fine clothes himself, nor could he
give his wife ornaments and new clothes. Her clothes
were very old, worn and torn. She was quite young, but
her breasts were dry, like those of an old woman, and
her belly was sunken. She was quite weak, but she was
still satisfied with whatever her husband brought.

I hear that in Western countries, the husband sometimes
does nothing, and the wife goes out to make money. It is
not like that in Indian culture, although India is also
becoming like that. Sudama’s wife was always in the
house, serving her husband. She used to cook whatever
her husband brought home, and she would give most of it
to her husband, but he was intelligent and kind, so he
used to take some and leave at least half. There was not
enough for either of them to eat, but they were
satisfied.

Sudama’s wife never disturbed him, because she knew that
he was a very exalted brahmana and devotee, always
chanting and remembering. She always helped her husband,
and served him obediently. She never quarreled with him,
or chastised him: “Why don’t you bring me any nice food,
clothing and ornaments? Why did you marry me if you
can’t support me properly?” She was not like this, but
very obedient and humble.

KRISHNA, THE WONDERFUL FRIEND

One day she went to her husband while he was absorbed in
his spiritual practices. Speaking very humbly with
folded hands, she said, “This is the third day that we
are fasting. I am not worried for myself, but I am so
worried for you. There is nothing for me to cook. I used
to beg from the neighbours, but I have been going to
them every day, so now I am too ashamed to go any more.

“I have been thinking that Krishna is your very
wonderful friend, He is very generous because He is
Parabrahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth. Because your
friend is Parabrahman, if a brahmana goes and meets Him,
He will at once donate more wealth than he can even
imagine. Why don’t you go and visit your friend?”

“I cannot do that,” Sudama replied. “I cannot beg
anything from my holy master Krishna. I am not the sort
of servant who will go and take something from Him.
Never.”

Then his wife said, “You don’t have to beg anything from
Him. He will see that you are a poor brahmana, and He
will give you more than you can imagine, even without
your asking Him. He is known to be very affectionate to
His devotees. When He sees you, He will give you a
donation automatically.

“In any case, You should go there just to meet Him, and
for no other reason. You won’t have to tell Him
anything, because He knows your heart anyway.”

Sudama’s wife kept speaking to him like this for some
days, and finally he thought, “I should go, but not to

                           10
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

beg anything. If He gives me something, I will be
satisfied. Let me just see the lotus feet of my Lord and
Master Krishnacandra and this will be of benefit for me.
So I must go.”

Then he smiled and said to his wife, “Please give me
something to present to Him. When I go there, He will
ask, ’Have you brought any present for me?’ Then what
will I say?”

There was no rice in the house to give Krishna as a
present, so Sudama’s wife begged two or three handfuls
of broken rice from a neighbor. She didn’t have a clean
cloth to wrap it in, so she had to put it in a very old
piece of cloth. She gave it to her husband, and he left,
absorbed in chanting and thinking of his friend.

THE WONDERFUL CITY OF DVARAKA

While he was on the road, he thought, “When I get to
Dvaraka, how will I manage to meet Krishna? He is the
King of kings; He is Dvarakadhisa, the Lord of Dvaraka,
and I am just like a poor street beggar. Will He
remember when we were students together in Sandipani
Muni’s school?” He was absorbed in this way for the
whole journey.

He walked all day and in the evening he finally arrived
at the great and wonderful city of Dvaraka. There was a
palace for each of Krishna’s 16,108 queens, and there
were more palaces for their beautiful maidservants. When
he reached the city, he passed through thirty or more
gates, one after another. Everyone showed him respect
and honor and offered obeisances to him, because they
could see his sacred thread (worn by Brahmana priests),
and knew that he was a brahmana. There was no
restriction on him, although the guards checked others
very strictly, just as they do at Singapore Airport.

Sudama asked which way to go to meet Krishna, and he was
advised to go to Rukmini’s palace. She was Krishna’s
chief queen in Dvaraka. When he reached her palace, they
took him to Rukmini’s room. There he saw Krishna sitting
on a very opulent and luxurious bed made of gold and
studded with jewels, and his queens serving Him and
fanning Him with beautiful whisks of white hair. As soon
as Krishna saw Sudama, he immediately ran towards him
barefoot and embraced him. “How merciful He is,” thought
the brahmana, and he began to weep.

KRISHNA RECEIVES THE BRAHMANA

Krishna gave Sudama His own seat on Rukmini’s bed, where
no one else ever sat except Krishna and Rukmini. Krishna
took a seat on the lower level and sent for golden bowls
and golden jugs of rose-water to bathe Sudama’s feet.
“He is my master,” Krishna told His queens, “and He is
as worshipable as the Supreme Lord Himself. You should
fan him with the whisks and give Me the water to wash
his feet.”

Sudama’s feet were dirty and full of cracks, because he
had no money for shoes. He was wearing an old, worn and
torn dhoti and an old piece of cloth around his neck

                           11
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

because he did not have a proper top-cloth. He felt
ashamed and embarrassed to be sitting on Rukmini’s bed
with Krishna washing his feet.

Everybody was wondering, “What is Krishna doing, and who
is this brahmana to whom He is giving so much honor?”
Meanwhile, Sri Krishna took the foot-bath water, and
poured it all over His own transcendental body. Then He
distributed it amongst His queens, saying, “Sprinkle
this water everywhere. Today we have all become
purified”.

We should understand the glory of devotees. This
understanding and practice is coming from the Vedic
period in ancient times, but we don’t know the power and
glory of these sublime traditions. But Krishna did this
Himself to teach us, and He gave instructions for the
water to be given to all his sons and daughters.

When they had received Sudama very nicely, Krishna put
His hands on his shoulders, and began to talk to him
just like a close friend. Meanwhile, Sudama began
looking at the inconceivable opulence around him. The
walls and pillars were made of gold, studded with
jewels, and decorated with the finest coral and silks.
Now Krishna said to Himself, “This brahmana is thinking,
’Has Krishna recognized me? Does He know that I am the
same Sudama who was His school friend? Perhaps He has
forgotten me, and He is honoring me just because I am a
brahmana.’”

To reassure his friend, Krishna began to recall their
past friendship. “Oh My friend, do you remember when we
were just small boys in the school of our Gurudeva
Sandipani Muni? We spent many days studying together,
and we became bosom friends. One day, our guru’s wife
said, ’O my dear sons, I have no dry wood for cooking.’”

Then both Krishna and Sudama remembered what had
happened when they went out to fetch wood.

LOST IN THE STORM

It was evening, and there were clouds in the sky. The
two friends went together to the nearby forest and
collected dry sticks and branches. While they were doing
so, heavy clouds gathered and torrents of rain began to
fall without stopping. Everywhere was flooded, and there
was no way of telling where the water was deep and where
it was shallow. Meanwhile, night fell, and it was
impossible to see anything.

The two boys huddled together all night in the shelter
of a tree, unable to go anywhere else because of the
deep water. Krishna is the Supreme Lord Bhagavan
Himself, but by the influence of His mystic pastime
potency He had forgotten that He is all-powerful and
all-knowing, and He had become just like an ordinary
boy.

In the morning, their guru Sandipani Muni began to
search everywhere for them. When he heard where they had
gone, he immediately went to the forest and began to
call out, “O Krishna! O Sudama! Where are you?”

                           12
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017


At last Sandipani Muni found the boys, and spoke to them
very affectionately. “Have you spent the whole night
here? You have given up everything for my happiness. You
are surrendered souls. I want disciples like you.” He
placed his hands on both their heads and blessed them:
“Your lives will be successful. Whatever you came to me
for, you will have. May all learning, all the arts, and
all the knowledge of all the Vedas and Upanisads come to
you at once.” As he spoke, it was so. In an instant,
they had complete realization of all knowledge.

After this, Sandipani Muni took their hands and brought
them back to his asrama, where his wife was waiting for
them.

When Krishna related this story of their boyhood, Sudama
realised that He was just not respecting him because he
was a brahmana. Krishna actually remembered him, and was
honoring him because he was His old friend.

KRISHNA APPRECIATES A HUMBLE OFFERING

Now Krishna smiled at Sudama and said, “My dear friend,
I know that you could not have come empty-handed. My
sister-in-law must have given you something to present
to me. Where is it?”

Then Sudama remembered the broken rice that he had
brought with him, and which he was keeping in its
wrapper under his arm. “How can I present that to
Krishna?” he thought. “Krishna is so soft, but that rice
is very hard tasteless. Besides, it is wrapped up in a
dirty old cloth. How can I give it to Krishna?”

But Krishna knew exactly what He was thinking, and
playfully snatched the broken rice from him. He opened
the wrapping and quickly ate a handful of the rice.

“This is the most delicious offering I have ever
tasted,” He said in delight. He was about to take a
second handful, but Rukmini and the other queens stopped
Him.

“Please don’t take any more! You have already given all
kinds of opulence and all that you have in return for
that one handful of rice. If You take a second handful,
You will have to give us to this brahmana as well. You
have given enough. Please don’t take any more, otherwise
we will die.” And Krishna stopped tasting the broken
rice.

SUDAMA RETURNS

After this, Krishna massaged the brahmana’s feet with
His own hands, talked to him very affectionately, and
served him all sorts of delicious prasad. He massaged
the brahmana’s feet the whole night, even while he
slept, until the brahmamuhurta, the auspicious time
before sunrise. Then Sudama awoke, took bath, chanted
his gayatri mantras, and performed all his devotional
activities. When he had done this, he said, “O Krishna,
my sakha, my very dear friend, now I want to return to
my home.”

                           13
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017


Krishna replied, “I am so happy that you came. You are
my friend. I request you, please come again and again,
and I may also visit you.”

When Sudama left the palace, Krishna followed him. (When
any Vaisnava or brahmana comes, we should stand up and
go to meet them, and when they leave we should follow
them to the border of the village or the town.) Krishna
was saying very sweet things to His friend, and bade him
farewell, but He did not give him any gifts, although a
wealthy householder normally offers lavish presentations
in charity to a worthy brahmana.

When they reached the border, Krishna returned, and
Sudama went on by himself just as he had come — in
dirty, old, worn and torn clothes. He thought happily to
himself, “Krishna is so merciful! If He had given me
wealth, I would have become absorbed in thinking about
my opulence, and I would have forgotten Him. He saw that
I am not qualified, and that is why He did not give me
anything.” Thinking how kind and merciful Krishna is,
Sudama began to cry.

TRANSFORMATION AT HOME

It was evening when he reached his village. But as he
came close to his house, he was puzzled. “Where is my
hut, which always leaks when it rains and which has no
rats because we have no food-grains? Where is my cow,
which is as thin as a skeleton? Where is my old
meditation seat of kusa grass? It has all disappeared!”

And indeed, everything had changed. In place of what he
had known before, there were 16,108 royal palaces.
People were riding horses and royal elephants along the
splendid roads. There were very beautiful gardens full
of lovely flowers and berries, and decorated with
attractive ponds of cool water. Peacocks danced madly,
and doves and cuckoos called melodiously.

“What has happened?” thought Sudama. “Where have I come?
Am I in heaven?”

Meanwhile, someone told his wife, “Your husband has
returned.” Oh, she was so happy. She came out very
joyfully to meet her husband. She was just like an
angel, for during the night Krishna had made her as
beautiful as a young, teenage girl. She was surrounded
by thousands of maidservants, for each of Krishna’s
16,108 queens had given something to Sudama and his
wife. Now they had all the wealth and opulence that one
could ever imagine. That is why he could not believe
that he had come to his own house.

Sudama’s wife saw her husband coming, with his stick in
his hand. He had not changed. He still wore the same
dirty, old clothes, and looked like a poor, old person,
although he was still young. Then she came out with her
whole party of 16, 108 maidservants, singing and playing
drums and many other musical instruments.

Sudama saw the party coming with golden water pots to
welcome him. He was surprised. “Why are they coming

                           14
Happiness_in_a_Fools_Paradise.txt              5/5/2017

towards me? Perhaps they have mistaken me for someone
else.” But there was no mistake. If Krishna had changed
Sudama as well as his wife, she would not have
recognized him when he came back. That is why Krishna
left him in his original form.

When she came towards Sudama with her arms outstretched,
he became alarmed and began to run away, but they
detained him. Immediately his wife touched him, he
became as young and beautiful as she was, and very
strong. Then Sudama said out loud, “O Krishna, you are
wonderful. I never wanted anything, but during the night
while we were asleep, You gave me so much wealth and
opulence!” and he began to weep. “How kind and merciful
Krishna is. We thought that He might give some donation,
but we cannot believe what He has given.”

KRISHNA LOOKS AFTER HIS DEVOTEES

We should understand that Krishna is very merciful. If
you chant His name, Hare Krishna, He will provide enough
for

you if you have some requirements or even if you don’t
have any requirement. So don’t be afraid. If you have a
job, you can donate one thousand or ten thousand dollars
a month. But if Krishna is pleased, then hundreds and
millions of dollars may come without your having to do
anything. Krishna will give so much. He will break open
a hole in the ceiling and he will pour it in.



Table of Contents

CHAPTER ONE - PURE LOVE AND AFFECTION

CHAPTER TWO - MY MISSION

CHAPTER THREE - SUDAMA BRAHMANA

CHAPTER ONE - PURE LOVE AND AFFECTION




                           15
