Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                         5/5/2017

Śrī Hari-Nāma Mahā-Mantra



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Tags: Śrī Hari-Nāma Mahā-Mantra Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja Nama-tattva Hare Krishna

Śrī Hari-Nāma Mahā-Mantra Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja Nama-tattva Hare Krishnattt



* * *




* * *




Śrī Hari-Nāma Mahā-Mantra



Contents

Śrī Hari-Nāma Mahā-Mantra

The Sequence of the Mahā-Mantra

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the Mahā-Mantra

Commentaries on the Mahā-Mantra

The Glories of Śrī Hari-Nāma

Śrī Hari-Nāma by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura




Śrī Hari-Nāma Mahā-Mantra




Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare

Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare



According to eternal śāstras such as the Vedas,

                            1
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

Upaniṣads, Purāṇas and Saṁhitās, the transcendental name
(nāma-brahma), hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare
hare / hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare is the
mahā-mantra (supreme mantra) for deliverance in Kali-
yuga1. The primary occupational duty (dharma) of this
age is to chant and perform saṅkīrtana of this sixteen
word mahā-mantra.

The name of Bhagavān is directly the personal form
(svarūpa) of Bhagavān. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has filled His
names with His sweet form, His sweet pastimes and all of
His potencies. Bhagavān is the possessor of His name and
is thus called nāmī. Although He (nāmī) and His name
(nāma) are nondifferent, in certain circumstances, the
mercy of nāma-brahma exceeds that of nāmī-brahma. By His
causeless mercy Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa appears in the
form of nāma to deliver the conditioned souls. One who
is most fortunate takes dīkṣā in śrī-hari-nāma mahā-
mantra from a bona fide guru who himself is constantly
absorbed in śrī hari-nāma. In this way he worships Śrī
Bhagavān by performing congregational chanting of His
names (saṅkīrtana), daily chanting a fixed number of
names (japa), and remembering Śrī Bhagavān’s name
(smaraṇa). Śāstra states that in Kali-yuga it is more
glorious to perform nāma-saṅkīrtana loudly than to
perform nāma-smaraṇa or japa.



japato hari-nāmāni

sthāne śata-guṇādhikaḥ

ātmānañ ca punāty uccair

japan śrotṛn punāti ca

(Śrī Nāradīya spoken by Prahlāda Mahārāja)



“A person who chants śrī-hari-nāma loudly is one hundred
times superior to one who chants quietly. The person who
chants quietly only benefits and purifies himself,
whereas one who chants loudly also benefits and purifies
all who hear him, such as animals, insects, birds, trees
and creepers. Such entities cannot chant, but they can
be delivered from the ocean of birth and death simply by
hearing this hari-nāma.”



Thus, in this age of Kali, the crest-jewel of all kinds
of sādhana is to perform saṅkīrtana of the sixteen word
hari-nāma mahā-mantra. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is
Pāvana-Avatārī, the most merciful avatāra who purifies
Kali-yuga. He therefore instructs us to perform śrī hari
nāma-saṅkīrtanaókīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ. (Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka
3)



The Bṛhad-Nāradīya-Purāṇa clearly states:


                            2
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                       5/5/2017



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā



“To make spiritual progress in Kali-yuga there is no
other way, there is no other way, there is no other way
than by chanting the holy name, chanting the holy name,
chanting the holy name.”




The Sequence of the Mahā-Mantra




One school of thought says that the mahā-mantra should
be chanted in the following sequence:



hare rāma hare rāma / rāma rāma hare hare

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa / kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare



This understanding is based on the following points:

1) The Kali-santaraṇa Upaniṣad, published by Venkatesh
Press, Mumbai, states that this mahā-mantra begins with
the words hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare
followed by hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare.

2) In a book called Kalyāṇa from Gorakhpura, the mahā-
mantra is written in the above mentioned sequence.

3) Śrī Rāma appeared in Tretā-yuga. Later Śrī Kṛṣṇa
appeared in Dvāpara-yuga. It is therefore logical to
chant hare rāma first and then hare kṛṣṇa.



The above mentioned views are both illogical and
unfounded:

1) Earlier publications of the Kali-santaraṇa Upaniṣad
by Venkatesh Press, Mumbai, clearly state that the mahā-
mantra begins with hare kṛṣṇa and not with hare rāma.
These earlier publications are still preserved in
libraries in Calcutta and Jaipura.

2) Kalyāṇa, published by Gītā Press, Gorakhpura, is not
a bona fide proof with which to support the above

                            3
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

perspective.

3) That Tretā-yuga is followed by Dvāpara-yuga has no
effect on the eternal mahā-mantra. The mahā-mantra is
beyond all yugas and time.



This topic can only be understood by chanting the brahma
mahā-mantra, the deliverer of all yugas. Reference to
Śrī Bhagavān’s names in the different yugas can be found
in the Ananta-Saṁhitā:



Satya-yuga:



nārāyaṇa-parā vedāh / nārāyaṇa-parākṣarāḥ

nārāyaṇa-parā-muktiḥ / nārāyaṇa-parā-gatiḥ



“Nārāyaṇa is declared the Supreme in all the Vedas.
Nārāyaṇa is the supreme combination of all letters.
Realization of Nārāyaṇa is the supreme liberation.
Nārāyaṇa is the supreme goal of life”



Tretā-yuga:



rāma nārāyaṇānanta / mukunda madhusūdana

kṛṣṇa keśava kaṁsāre / hare vaikuṇṭha vāmana



“He Rāma! He Nārāyaṇa! He Ānanta! He Mukunda! He
Madhusūdana! He Kṛṣṇa! He Keśava! He Kaṁsāre! He Hare!
He Vaikuṇṭha! He Vāmana!”



Dvāpara-yuga:



hare murāre madhu-kaiṭabhāre

gopāla govinda mukunda śaure

yajñeśa nārāyaṇa kṛṣṇa viṣṇo

nirāśrayaṁ māṁ jagadīśa rakṣa



“Hare, Murāre, Madhu-Kaiṭabhāre, Gopāla, Govinda,
Mukunda, Śaure (Lord of all yajñas), Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa,

                            4
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                        5/5/2017

Viṣṇu! He Jagadīśa, please protect me! I have no other
shelter.”



Kali-yuga:



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa / kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma / rāma rāma hare hare

ṣoḍaśaitāni nāmāni / dvātriṁśad varṇakāni hi

kalau yuge mahā-mantraḥ / sammato jīva-tāraṇe



“Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma
hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare. This hari-nāma mahā-
mantra consists of sixteen names and thirty-two
syllables. In Kali-yuga this mantra can deliver all
jīvas.”



Thus, in regard to the third point, it is evident that
the brahma mahā-mantra (Kṛṣṇa’s name) was present as the
deliverer even in Tretā-yuga, before the appearance of
Kṛṣṇa in Dvāpara-yuga, with names such as Mukunda,
Madhusūdana, Kṛṣṇa, Keśava and Kaṁsāri. Therefore, the
advice and arguments given about the reversed sequence
of the mahā-mantra are invalid.

The ślokas of the Ananta-Saṁhitā clearly state that in
the Upaniṣads, such as the Kali-santaraṇa Upaniṣad, the
mahā-mantra is written in the following sequence: hare
kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma hare
rāma rāma rāma hare hare.

Nāradajī received the mahā-mantra in this sequence from
his guru, Brahmājī, and this tradition is still
practiced today in the Brahmā-Mādhva-Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava-
Sampradāya. In other sampradāyas, however, this mahā-
mantra does not descend through the guru-paramparā, and
therefore its secret and sequence are unknown to persons
in those sampradāyas. It is no wonder that they reverse
the sequence of the mahā-mantra and begin it with hare
rāma.

Other bona fide śāstras give evidence regarding the form
of the mahā-mantra:



śiṣyasyodaṅmukha-sthasya / harer nāmāni ṣoḍaśa

saṁśrāvyaiva tato dadyān / mantraṁ trai-lokya-maṅgalam

(Śrī-jñānāmṛta-sāra)




                            5
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

“Śrī Gurudeva should recite the sixteen word hare kṛṣṇa
mantra to the disciple before initiating him into the
gopāla-mantra, which brings auspiciousness to the three
worlds. To receive this gopāla-mantra, the disciple must
sit facing north and receive the mantra in his right
ear.”



In śāstras such as the Brahma Yāmala, Lord Śiva
describes the svarūpa (form) of the mahā-mantra:



hariṁ vinā nāsti kiñcat

pāpa-nistārakaṁ kalau

tasmāl lokoddhāraṇārthaṁ

hari-nāma prakāśayet



sarvatra mucyate loko

mahā-pāpāt kalau yuge

hare-kṛṣṇa-pada-dvandvaṁ

kṛṣṇeti ca pada-dvayam



tathā hare-pada-dvandvaṁ

hare-rāma iti dvayam

tad-ante ca mahā-devi

rāma rāma dvayaṁ vadet



hare hare tato brūyād

hari-nāma samuccararet

mahā-mantraṁ ca kṛṣṇasya

sarva-pāpa-praṇāśakam iti



“He Mahādevī! Look! In Kali-yuga there is no easier way
to eradicate sins other than śrī hari-nāma. It is
therefore essential to propagate śrī hari-nāma among the
general populace. The people in Kali-yuga can be easily
liberated from the greatest hell by performing
saṅkīrtana of this mahā-mantra. To chant the mahā-
mantra, first chant hare kṛṣṇa twice, then chant kṛṣṇa
twice, then hare twice. After that, chant hare rāma
twice, then rāma twice and again hare twice. One should
chant, articulate and perform sankīrtana etc., of Śrī

                            6
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa's mahā-mantra, which destroys all sins.” This is
described in these two stanzas.




The Rādhā Tantra states:



śṛṇu mātar mahā-māye

viśva-bīja-svarūpiṇi

hari-nāmno mahāmāye

kramaṇavat sureśvari



“A bhakta prays, ‘He viśva-bīja-svarūpiṇi (seed of the
universe)! Sureśvari (who are worshipable by the
demigods)! Mahāmāyā! Mātā! Please hear my prayer and
explain to me the sequence of the mahā-mantra.’ “



In response to this, Devī says:



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma

rāma rāma hare hare

dvātriṁśad akṣarāṇy eva

kalau nāmāni sarvadam

etan mantraṁ putra-śreṣṭha

prathamaṁ śṛṇuyān naraḥ



“O best among sons! The mahā-mantra for Kali-yuga
bestows all perfection. This mahā-mantra, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
nāma, is composed of sixteen names and thirty-two
syllables: hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare /
hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare. Therefore, a
person who desires his own welfare should first hear
this mahā-mantra from his Gurudeva.”



In the same Rādhā-Tantra, Tripurā Devī also suggests:




                             7
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

hari-nāmnā vinā putra

dīkṣā ca viphalā bhavet

guru-deva-mukhāc chrutvā

hari-nāma parākṣaram



brāhmaṇa-kṣatra-viṭ-śūdrāḥ / śrutvā nāma parākṣaram

dīkṣāṁ kuryuḥ suta-śreṣṭha / mahā-vidyā-su-sundara



“O best among sons, you are conversant with the greatest
jñāna. Look! If you hear the gopāla-mantra from Śrī
Gurudeva before hearing the hare kṛṣṇamahā-mantra, the
results of the gopāla-mantra will become void.
Therefore, persons of all varṇas, such as brāhmaṇas and
kṣatriyas, first have to hear this mahā-mantra from Śrī
Gurudeva before they accept initiation into the gopāla-
mantra.”



The Padma-Purāṇa also states:



dvātriṁśad akṣaraṁ mantraṁ / nāma ṣoḍaśakānvitam

prajapan vaiṣṇavo nityaṁ / rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sthalaṁ labhet



“Any Vaiṣṇava who constantly chants the hare kṛṣṇa mahā-
mantra, which is endowed with sixteen names consisting
of thirty-two syllables, will certainly attain the abode
of Śrī Śrī Rādhā Kṛṣṇa in Goloka Vrṇdāvana Dhāma.”



In the Rādhā-Hṛdaya-Khaṇḍa of the Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa,
Romaharṣaṇa Sūta prays to Śrī Veda Vyāsa as follows:



yat tvayā kīrtitaṁ nātha / hari-nāmeti saṁjñitam

mantraṁ brahma-padaṁ siddhi / karaṁ tad vada no vibho



“He Vibho! He Prabhu! Please instruct me in the brahma-
svarūpa nāma-mantra of Śrī Hari which is the bestower of
all perfections.”



In reply, Śrī Veda Vyāsa gives the following
instruction:


                            8
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

grahaṇād yasya mantrasya

dehī brahma-mayo bhavet

sadyaḥ pūtaḥ surā-po ‘pi

sarva-siddhi-yuto bhavet

tad ahaṁ te 'bhidhāsyāmi

mahā-bhāgavato hy asi



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma

rāma rāma hare hare



iti ṣoḍaśakaṁ nāmnāṁ

tri-kāla-kalmaṣāpaham

nātaḥ parataropāyaḥ

sarva-vedeṣu vidyate



“O my son, I will certainly instruct you in that mahā-
mantra, the acceptance of which a person in the bodily
conception of life can be liberated and even a drunkard
can quickly become purified and attain all perfection. I
will instruct you because you are a mahā-bhāgavata and a
suitable candidate. Just see! The sixteen word mahā-
mantra, hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare /
hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare, can destroy the
sins of the three worlds. The four Vedas do not mention
a method for achieving liberation from material bondage
superior to the chanting of this mahā-mantra.”



Ananta-Saṁhitā also states:



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma

rāma rāma hare hare



ṣoḍasaitāni nāmāni


                              9
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

dvā-triṁśad varṇakāṇi hi

kalāu yuge mahā-mantraḥ

sammato jīva-tāraṇe



utsṛjyaitān mahā-mantraṁ

ye tv anyat kalpitaṁ padam

mahā-nāmeti gāyanti

te śāstra-guru-laṅghinaḥ



“All śāstras agree that the hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra,
which is composed of sixteen names and thirty-two
syllables, is the supreme mantra for delivering the
jīvas in Kali-yuga. Those who neglect this mahā-mantra
and accept any other process, due to their own
imagination or the imagination of others, disobey guru
and śāstra. If someone asks, ‘Why is this sixteen word
hare kṛṣṇa mantra the mahā-mantra?’ then the following
answer is given. ‘Among all of Kṛṣṇa’s names, no name
other than Hari can easily take away sins, great
misfortune and ignorance. No name other than Kṛṣṇa can
deliver prema. And no name other than Rāma can bestow
liberation.’ This is why the mahā-mantra is composed of
these three primary names. Secondly, these sixteen names
are an invocation. Thus oṁ, namaḥ, klīṁ, svāhā, etc.,
are not required to make the mantra more potent. For
this reason it is called the mahā-mantra.”



The Sanat-Kumāra-Saṁhitā states:



hare kṛṣṇau dvir āvṛttau

kṛṣṇa tādṛk tathā hare

hare rāma tathā rāma

tathā tādṛk hare punaḥ



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma

rāma rāma hare hare



This means first chant hare kṛṣṇa twice, then kṛṣṇa
twice, followed by hare twice. Then chant hare rāma

                             10
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

twice, rāma twice and then hare twice. By this we get
the mahā-mantra, hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare
hare / hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare.



In the Yajur Veda, the Kali-santaraṇa Upaniṣad also
describes the svarūpa and glories of the mahā-mantra in
this way:



hariḥ oṁ. dvāparānte nārado brahmāṇaṁ jagāma kathaṁ
bhagavan! gāṁ paryaṭan kalim santareyam iti. sa hovāca
brahmā sādhu pṛṣto 'smi sarva-śruti-rahasyaṁ gopyaṁ tac
chṛṇu yena kali-saṁsāraṁ tariṣyasi. bhagavata ādi-
puruṣasya nārāyaṇasya nāmoccāraṇa-mātreṇa nirdhūta-kalir
bhavati. nāradaḥ punaḥ papraccha. tan-nāma kim iti? sa
hovāca hiraṇya-garbhaḥ, "hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa
kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare
hare." iti ṣoḍaśakaṁ nāmnāṁ kali-kalmaṣa-nāśanam. nātaḥ
parataropāyaḥ sarva-vedeṣu dṛśyate. iti ṣoḍaśa-
kalāvṛtasya jīvasyāvaraṇa-vināśanam. tataḥ prakāśate
paraṁ brahma meghāpāye ravi-raśmi-maṇdalīveti. punar
nāradaḥ papraccha. bhagavan ko 'sya vidhir iti? sa
hovāca nāsya vidhir iti. sarvadā śūcir aśucir vā paṭhan
brahmaṇaḥ sa-lokatāṁ samīpatām sa-rūpa

tāṁ sāyujyatām iti.



“At the end of Dvārapa-yuga, Śrī Nārada went to Śrī
Brahmā, and, after offering his obeisances inquired, ‘O
Lord, how can I cross beyond the influence of this age
of Kali while wandering on this earthly planet?’



“Brahmājī replied, ‘O son, you have asked an excellent
question. Please hear the most confidential secret of
the entire Vedas by which you can easily cross this
world of Kali. By uttering the name of that ādi-puruṣa
who is Bhagavān Śrī Nārāyaṇa (Kṛṣṇa), the personality of
Kali-yuga begins to tremble.’



“Nāradajī further inquired, ‘Which name of Śrī Bhagavān
and what is its svarūpa?’"



“In reply Brahmājī said, ‘Hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa
kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare
hare. This mahā-mantra, thus composed of sixteen names,
can completely destroy all the sins of Kali-yuga. A
superior sādhana does not appear in the entire Vedas.
The mahā-mantra is covered by sixteen qualities, which
means that it can destroy the five gross elements
(pañca-bhūta) and the eleven senses which cover the
jīva. Then Paraṁbrahma manifests before the jīva, just
like the sun whose rays shine brightly when the clouds'
covering is removed.’

                            11
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017




“Nāradajī then asked, ‘Oh Lord, what are the rules and
regulations for chanting this mahā-mantra?’



“Brahmājī said, ‘There are no rules and regulations for
chanting this mahā-mantra. One can chant in a pure or an
impure state. Moreover, by clearly pronouncing this
mahā-mantra, one can attain brahma (salokya, samīpya,
sarūpya and sāyujya). Not only that, one can attain
kṛṣṇa-prema, the fifth goal of human life (pañcama-
puruṣārtha).’”



Śrī Bhakti-Chandrika, 7th Paṭala states:



atha mantra-varaṁ vakṣye

dvātrimśad akṣarānvitam

sarva-pāpa-praśamanaṁ

sarva-durvāsanānalam



catur-varga-pradaṁ saumyaṁ

bhakti-daṁ prema-pūrvakam

durbuddhi-haraṇaṁ śuddha

sattva-buddhi-pradāyakam



sarvārādhyaṁ sarva-sevyaṁ

sarveṣāṁ kāma-pūrakam

sarvādhikāra-samyuktaṁ

sarva-lokaika-bāndhavam



sarvākarsaṇa-samyuktaṁ

duṣṭa-vyādhi-vināśanam

dīkṣā-vidhi-vihīnaṁ ca

kālākāla-vivarjitam



vāṇ-mātreṇārcitaṁ bāhya


                             12
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

pūjā-vidhy-anapekṣakam

jihvā-sparśana-mātreṇa

sarveṣāṁ phala-dāyakam

deśa-kālāniyamitaṁ

sarva-vādi-susammatam



“This mahā-mantra is endowed with thirty-two syllables
and can destroy all sins. Just as fire destroys, this
mahā-mantra can destroy all evil habits and bestow
dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa. Its beautiful form
(svarūpa) is capable of stealing all of one’s foolish,
ignorant mentality, and it is the giver of śuddha-
sattvika intelligence. It bestows the symptoms of prema-
bhakti. It is worshipable and is worthy of being served
by all. Śrī nāma fulfills everyone’s desires. All are
qualified to serve this mahā-mantra, meaning all are
qualified to perform saṅkīrtana of the mahā-mantra. This
mahā-mantra is the personal well-wisher of everyone and
is endowed with the potency to attract all. It is the
destroyer of all afflictions. It does not consider the
rules of dīkṣā, and is not restricted by time. The mahā-
mantra is worshipped just by saying it. No external
paraphernalia is required. It is capable of giving
results simply by its contact with the tongue, without
considering the rules pertaining to time, place and
circumstance.”



The Pippalāda branch of the Athārva-Veda states:



sva-nāma-mūla-mantreṇa

sarvaṁ hlādayati vibhuḥ

sa eva mūla-mantraṁ japati

harir iti kṛṣṇa iti rāma iti



“That mahā-mantra, which is composed of the name, form,
etc., of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the origin of all avatāras, is
making everyone joyful. He Himself, in the form of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, is clearly chanting the hare
kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, the source of all mantras.”



The following śloka explains the result of performing
kīrtana etc. of the mahā-mantra:



mantro guhyaḥ paramo bhakti-vedyaḥ


                             13
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

nāmāny aṣṭāv aṣṭa ca śobhanāni

tāni nityaṁ ye japanti dhīrās

te vai māyām atitaranti nānye

paramaṁ mantraṁ parama-rahasyaṁ nityam āvartayati



“The mahā-mantra is most confidential and can only be
understood through bhakti. Eight of its sixteen charming
words are hare kṛṣṇa and the other eight are hare rāma.
Therefore, only those intelligent persons who constantly
chant these names will be liberated from māyāóand not
others. That is why intelligent persons always chant,
perform kīrtana of and remember the mahā-mantra.”

In the Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa (Northern Division, Chapter 6)
Pippalāda mentions that Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja once prayed
to Kratu Muni, “O Lord, if you want to favour me, then
please donate to me the names of Hari.” At that moment
the saintly Kratu Muni gave him the sixteen name mahā-
mantra. Therefore, an intelligent person should
constantly perform saṅkīrtana of this mahā-mantra: nāma-
saṅkīrtanaṁ tasmāt sadā kāryaṁ vipaścitā.




Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the Mahā-Mantra




Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who established the chanting of
śrī hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, instructs the bhaktas to
perform saṅkīrtana of the mahā-mantra.



Śrī Vāsudeva Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya says:



viṣaṇṇa-cittān kali-ghora-bhītān

sanvīkṣya gauro hari-nāma-mantram

svayaṁ dadau bhakta-janān samādiśat

saṅkīrtayadhvaṁ nanu nṛtya-vādyaiḥ



“Out of His causeless mercy, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
Himself gave the mahā-mantra to the helpless, fearful
jīvas of this Kali-yuga, and directed His devotees by
saying, ‘O bhaktas, you should collectively perform
saṅkīrtana by singing and dancing.’ “



                            14
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                        5/5/2017


harer nāma-prasādena / nistaret pātakī janaḥ

upadeṣṭā svayaṁ kṛṣṇa / caitanyo jagad-īśvaraḥ



kṛṣṇa-caitanya-devena / hari-nāma-prakāśitam

yena kenāpi tat-praptaṁ / dhanyo' sau loka-pāvanaḥ



“By the mercy of hari-nāma, a sinner can also be
delivered because the instructor of śrī hari-nāma is the
Lord of the universe, Svayaṁ Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Therefore, a person who is fortunate enough
to receive this hari-nāma, which has been inaugurated by
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself, can also purify
others by his association.”



The great poet Śrīla Kavi Karṇapūra states in his epic
poem, Śrī Caitanya-Carita (11-54):



tataḥ śrī-gaurāṅgaḥ samavadad atīva pramudito

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



“At the time of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s sannyāsa
ceremony, the barber who had been asked to shave Him
felt morose and was perturbed. Although he held the
razor in his hand, he could not bring himself to shave
off Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s beautiful hair. Instead he
simply wept. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who was fully
immersed in rādhā-bhāva, became deeply pleased and said,
‘O Barber! You must constantly and loudly chant hare
kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma hare
rāma rāma rāma hare hare.’ Upon hearing these
instructions from Śrī Mahāprabhu, that barber began to
chant, and, although he continued to weep in distress,
he proceeded to shave off Mahāprabhu’s hair. He became
so absorbed in chanting the mahā-mantra that he
manifested horripilation (romañca) and his bodily hairs
stood erect (pulaka).”



Śrī Caitanya-Maṅgala states:



bāhu prasāriyā prabhu brāhmaṇe tulilā

tāra ghare bhakti-bhare gāna āraṁbhilā



                            15
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017


brāhmaṇera ghara yena haila vṛndāvana

hari-nāma śunibāre āise sarva-jana



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



“Once Mahāprabhu visited the home of a brāhmaṇa and
embraced him. The kīrtana that followed made that home
become just like Vrndāvana and a multitude of people
gathered to hear and chant the mahā-mantra: hare kṛṣṇa
hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare / hare rāma hare rāma
rāma rāma hare hare.”



Śrī Caitanya Maṅgala also states:



hare kṛṣṇa nāma prabhu bole nirantara

prasanna śrī-mukhe hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa bali

vijaya hailā gauracandra kutūhalī

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa bali prema-sukhe

pratyakṣa hailā āsi advaita-sammukhe



“Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is always chanting śrī nāma.
One day when He came to the home of Advaita Ācaryā, His
face filled with pleasure as He chanted the hare kṛṣṇa
mahā-mantra.”



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta states:



kṛṣṇa nāma mahā-mantra ei t’svabhāva

yei jape tāra kṛṣṇe upajaye bhāva

(C.c.Ādi-līlā 7.83)



“The nature of the hare kṛṣṇamahā-mantra is such that
when a person chants it, he immediately develops his
loving ecstatic relationship with Kṛṣṇa.”



kṛṣṇa viṣayaka premāóparama-purusārtha

                            16
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                       5/5/2017


yāra āge tṛṇa-tulya cāri puruṣārtha

(C.c. Ādi-līlā 7.84)



“When the four goals of human life, dharma (perfectly
performing one’s occupational duty), artha (accumulating
wealth), kāma (satisfying one’s sensual desires) and
mokṣa (attaining liberation), stand before kṛṣṇa-prema,
the fifth and topmost goal, they appear as insignificant
as straw in the street.”



“pañcama-puruṣārthaópremānandāmṛta-sindḥu

brahmādi-ānanda yāra nahe eka bindu”

(C.c. Ādi-līlā 7.85)



“The pleasures derived from dharma, artha, kāma and
mokṣa appear like a drop in the ocean in the presence of
a person who has developed bhāva.”



“kṛṣṇa-nāmera phal’ premā, sarva śāstre kaya”

(C.c. Ādi-līlā 7. 86)



“The conclusion of all śāstra is that the fruit of
kṛṣṇa-nāma is prema.”




kali-kāle nāma-rūpe kṛṣṇa-avatāra

nāma haite haya sarva-jagat-nistāra

(C.c. Ādi-līlā 17.22)



"The holy name of Śrī Bhagavān, the hare kṛṣṇa mahā-
mantra, is His avatāra in this age of Kali. Just by
chanting this name, one associates with Śrī Kṛṣṇa
directly. Anyone ∑who does this is certainly delivered.”




avatari’ caitanya kaila dharma pracāraṇa

kali-kāle dharmaókṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana


                            17
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

(C.c. Madhya-līlā 11.98)



“Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has descended in Kali-yuga to
propagate the dharma of the age, chanting the holy names
of Kṛṣṇa.”




saṅkīrtana-yajñe tāṅre kare ārādhana

sei ta sumedhā āraókali-hata-jana

(C.c. Madhya-līlā 11.99)



“A person who worships Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu by
performing saṅkīrtana should be considered to possess
great intelligence. It is understood that one who does
not perform saṅkīrtana has no intelligence and is a
victim of Kali.”




nirantara kara kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana

helāya mukti pābe, pābe prema-dhana

(C.c. Madhya-līlā 25.154)



“Always chant kṛṣṇa-nāma and you will very easily
achieve mukti. Finally you will receive the treasure of
kṛṣṇa-prema.”



eka ‘nāmābhāse’ tomāra pāpa-doṣa yābe

āra ‘nāma’ laite kṛṣṇa-caraṇa pāibe

(C.c. Madhya-līlā 25.199)



“Begin to chant the hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra and, at the
stage of nāmābhāsa, when your chanting is almost pure,
all your sinful reactions will be removed. When you
perfectly chant hare kṛṣṇa, you will attain the shelter
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.”




nāmera phale kṛṣṇa-pade prema upajaya


                            18
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

(C.c. Antya-līlā 3.178)



“The result of chanting nāma without offence is that a
person will awaken his ecstatic love for the lotus feet
of Kṛṣṇa.”




kali-kālera dharmaókṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana

(C.c. Antya-līlā 7.11)



“In Kali-yuga the dharma is to chant kṛṣṇa-nāma-
saṅkīrtana.”




harṣe prabhu kahenaó śuna svarūpa-rāma-rāya

nāma-saṅkīrtana kalau parama upāya

(C.c. Antya-līlā 20. 8)



“In great jubilation Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, ‘My
dear Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāmānanda Rāya, understand
that the easiest way to attain liberation in this age of
Kali is by chanting hari-nāma.’ “




saṅkīrtana-yajñe kalau kṛṣṇa-ārādhana

sei ta sumedhā pāya kṛṣṇera caraṇa

(C.c. Antya-līlā 20.9)



“In this age of Kali, the system for worshipping Kṛṣṇa
is to perform yajña by chanting Śrī Bhagavān’s name.
Someone who does so is considered to be intelligent, and
he will definitely attain the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.”



nāma-saṅkīrtane haya sarvānartha-nāśa

sarva-śubhodaya, kṛṣṇa-premera ullāsa

(C.c. Antya-līlā 20.11)



                            19
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017


“By chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma, one can eradicate all anarthas.
In this way all good fortune is awakened and the bliss
of kṛṣṇa-prema begins.”




khāite śuite yathā tathā nāma laya

kāla-deśā-niyama nāhi sarva-siddhi haya

(C.c. Antya-līlā 20.18)



“One who chants the name while eating or sleeping,
regardless of time or place, attains all perfection.”




ei mata hañā yei kṛṣṇa-nāma laya

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇe tāṅra prema upajaya

(C.c. Antya-līlā 20.26)



“A person will definitely awaken prema for the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa if he chants krṣṇa-nāma like this.”




Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī states in the introduction
to his commentary on the mahā-mantra:



ekadā kṛṣṇa-virahād

dhyāyantī priya-saṅgamam

mano-bāṣpa-nirāsārthaṁ

jalpatīdaṁ muhur muhuḥ



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma

rāma rāma hare hare




                            20
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

yāni nāmāni virahe

jajāpa vārṣabhānavī

tānye va tad-bhāva-yukto

gauracandro jajāpa ha



śrī-caitanya-mukhodgīrṇā

hare kṛṣṇeti varṇakāḥ

majjayanto jagat premṇi

vijayantāṁ tadāhvayāḥ




“Once, Śrīmatī Rādhikā was feeling overwhelming distress
due to separation from Her beloved Śyāmasundara and She
meditated upon meeting Him. To remove Her fire of
separation, She began to chant the hare kṛṣṇamahā-
mantra. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is absorbed in the
mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, also chanted these names. Thus,
Kṛṣṇa’s sixteen names consisting of thirty-two
syllables, the hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, came from the
lotus mouth of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. May this mahā-
mantra, which makes the entire universe become absorbed
in kṛṣṇa-prema, be graciously and conspicuously present
above all else. Jaya ho! Jaya ho! Let there be complete
victory for the mahā-mantra!”



Reference to the mahā-mantra is also found in the
Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa, Uttara-khaṇḍa, 6.55:



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



“The three names, Hare, Kṛṣṇa, and Rāma, which are in
the vocative case, comprise the mahā-mantra.”



The following ślokas from Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavata also
show the supremacy of hari-nāma: (Ādi 14.137,139-143),
(Madhya 6.117), (Madhya 23.74-78) and (Madhya 28.28).




Commentaries on the Mahā-Mantra


                            21
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017




Mādhurya-Mayī



The mahā-mantra consists of three words. Each word is in
the vocative case2 , meaning it is a ‘calling out’, or
an address. These words are Hare, Kṛṣṇa and Rāma.



vijñāpya bhagavat-tattvaṁ

cid-ghanānanda-vigraham

haraty avidyāṁ tat-kāryam

ato harir iti smṛtaḥ



ānandaika-sukhaḥ śrīmān

śyāmaḥ kamala-locanaḥ

gokulānanda-do nanda

nandanaḥ kṛṣṇa īryate



vaidagdhī sāra-sarvasvaṁ

mūrti-līlādhidaivatam

śrī-rādhāṁ ramaya nityaṁ

rāma ity abhidhīyate

(Brahmāṇḍa-Purāṇa)



“Śrī Bhagavān is sac-cid-ānanda vigraha, the embodiment
of eternity, knowledge and bliss. Because He is able to
eradicate all ignorance, the term Hari (one who takes
away) is an appropriate way to remember Him. It is only
lotus-eyed Nanda-nandana, Śrī Śyāmasundara, the bestower
of bliss to the residents of Gokula, who is referred to
as Kṛṣṇa (the all-attractive one). Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
līlā-vigraha (personification of pastimes) and the
crest-jewel of all expertise and wisdom. Because He
eternally enjoys conjugal pastimes with Śrīmatī Rādhīkā,
He is also known as Rāma (the enjoyer).”




Aiśvarya-Mayī



                            22
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017


The Āgama-śāstra states:



harati tri-vidhaṁ tāpaṁ

janma-koṭi-śatodbhavam

pāpaṁ ca smaratāṁ yasmāt

tasmād dharir iti smṛtaḥ



kṛṣir bhū-vācakaḥ śabdo

ṇaś ca nirvṛtir vācakaḥ

tayor aikyaṁ paraṁ brahma

kṛṣṇa ity abhidhīyate



ramante yogino ‘nante

satyānande cid-ātmani

iti rāma-padenāsau

paraṁ brahmābhidīyate




“Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is known as Hari because He destroys
the three-fold afflictions of countless births as well
as the sinful activities performed by the body, mind and
words of those devotees who remember Him. Kṛṣ means ‘all
attractive’ and ṇa means ‘joyful’. The combination of
these syllables refers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the all-attractive
parabrahma. Yogīs on the transcendental platform derive
great joy by meditating upon Him as the infinite form of
supreme bliss (nityānanda-svarūpa), and as He who has a
transcendental form (cinmaya-svarūpa). For this reason,
He is called Rāma (the supreme enjoyer).”



Yugala-Smaraṇa-Mayī



Śruti-śāstra states:



mano harati kṛṣṇasya

kṛṣṇāhlāda-svarūpiṇī

tato harā śrī-rādhaiva

                            23
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017


tasyāḥ saṁbodhanaṁ hare



apagṛhya trāpaṁ dharmaṁ

dhairyaṁ mānaṁ vraja-striyaḥ

veṇunā karṣati gṛhāt

tena kṛṣṇo’ bhidhīyate



ramayaty aniśaṁ rūpa

lāvaṇyair vraja-yoṣitām

manaḥ pañcendriyānīha

rāmas tasmāt prakīrtitaḥ



“Śrī Rādhā is the hlādinī-śakti (pleasure potency) of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She is known as Harā (one who steals away)
because She can captivate Kṛṣṇa’s mind. Harā is
addressed as Hare. Vraja-rāja-kumāra, the Prince of
Vraja, is known as Kṛṣṇa. Because the sound of His flute
is so attractive to the cowherd damsels, they lose their
natural shyness, sense of dharma, pride, composure and
leave their households. Therefore, He is known as Kṛṣṇa.
The extraordinary beauty of His form (rūpa-lāvaṇya)
always surcharges the minds and senses of the cowherd
damsels with ever-increasing bliss. For this reason He
is glorified as Rāma.”




Commentary by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī



HareóŚrī Kṛṣṇacandra’s transcendental beauty captivates
the minds of all, but Śrīmatī Rādhikā captivates the
mind of Śrī Kṛṣṇa by exercising Her unrivalled
cleverness. Therefore, She is known as Harā. The
vocative case of Harā is Hare.



KṛṣṇaóŚrī Hari, who is adorned with qualities which
bewilder the three worlds, attracts Śrīmatī Rādhikā by
His youthful beauty and the sweet sound of His flute.
Therefore, He is called Kṛṣṇa, the all-attractive one.



HareóŚrī Kṛṣṇa kidnapped doe-eyed Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
taking Her to a secluded kuñja within the rāsa-maṇḍala.
This has been learned from the words of mahā-puruṣas.

                            24
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

Therefore, Rādhikā is known as Harā. Harā in its
vocative case becomes Hare.



KṛṣṇaóThe magnificent effulgence that emanates from His
limbs can convert gold into śyāma-varṇa (a dark sapphire
lustre). That Rādhā-Ramaṇa Śyāmasundara is called Kṛṣṇa.



KṛṣṇaóŚrī Hari manifested Śyāma Kuṇḍa, the topmost of
all sarovaras, in the forest of Vraja near Govardhana.
He did this in accordance with the desire of His beloved
Śrī Rādhikā, and He attracted all tīrthas to it. Learned
people who understand this deep secret therefore call
Him Kṛṣṇa.



KṛṣṇaóAlthough His pastimes on the banks of the Yamunā
in Vṛndāvana bewilder the world, the all-attractive
dhīra-lalita-nāyaka Śrī Hari is attracted by the
transcendental prema of Śrī Rādhikā which is celebrated
by the name of mahābhāva. That is why learned people
call Him Kṛṣṇa.



HareóWhilst living in Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa stole away the
life force of the strong bull-like demon, Ariṣṭāsura,
and at that very moment Śrīmatī Rādhikā, in great
jubilation, loudly chanted “Hari Hari!” For this reason
Śrī Rādhā is known as Harā. Harā is addressed as Hare.



HareóŚrī Rādhikā sings the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
indistinct tones and sometimes, out of intense
affection, She sings loudly. Therefore, learned scholars
who are discerning in rasa-tattva refer to Her as Harā.
Harā is addressed as Hare.



HareóIn Vṛndāvana, Śrī Rādhikā playfully steals away the
flute as it falls from the hands of rasa immersed Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.This is why Rādhikā Devī is known as Harā. The
address for Harā is Hare.



RāmaóŚrī Kṛṣṇa is parirambha-vicakṣaṇa, the crest-jewel
amongst those ingenious in the arts of embracing. He is
thus known as Rāma because He wanders with Śrī Rādhikā,
playing and enjoying with Her in the kuñjas of
Govardhana.



HareóŚrī Rādhikā is most merciful. She steals all the
miseries of the bhaktas and daily bestows inner
happiness upon them. Thus, She is known as Harā and is
addressed as Hare.

                            25
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017




RāmaóThe minds of the bhaktas who perform bhajana
delight in paramānanda-sindhu, the topmost ocean of
bliss, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. For this reason that Śyāmasundara
vigraha, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is known as Rāma.



RāmaóIn the kuñjas Śrīmatī Rādhikā pleases Śrī Hari with
Her prema. Therefore, according to the definition of
ramayati ānandayati, ‘He who gives happiness and bliss’,
He is called Rāma. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is also known as Rāma
because He unites with Śrī Rādhā.



RāmaóWhen Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the giver of pleasure to the
bhaktas, saw all the Vrajavāsīs fearful and weeping, He
swallowed the forest fire, thus giving them great
pleasure. Therefore, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who arranges for His
bhaktas to enjoy with Him, is called Rāma.



HareóŚrī Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā Purī to kill Kaṁsa and
other demons. His sole intention was to return to Vraja
and meet with Śrī Rādhikā. She attracts Śrī Kṛṣṇa from
dhāmas like Mathurā and brings Him to Vraja. For this
reason She is called Harā (one who steals). Harā is
addressed as Hare.



HareóŚrī Nanda-nandana came from Mathurā and Dvārakā to
steal away all the miseries of the Vrajavāsīs. That
Nanda-nandana, who is endowed with pastimes that
captivate the mind of Śrī Rādhikā, is called Hari. The
word Hari becomes Hare in the vocative case.



Thus ends the commentary on the mahā-mantra by Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī




Commentary by Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī



Mahā-bhāgavatas eternally remember the all-blissful
śyāma-kiśora-vigraha, Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa, who can destroy
ignorance as well as material existence arising from
ignorance.

When mahā-bhāgavatas see that their disciples are
qualified, meaning that they are grateful, silent,
victorious over their senses, pure-hearted and above
all, that their hearts are full of attachment (anurāga)
to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa, they bless them by mercifully

                            26
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

giving them the hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, which is
composed of three words.



HareóFire can burn anything, even without our desiring
it to burn. Similarly, Prabhu can remove all the sins of
a person with a wicked mind regardless of his mood in
remembering Him. Thus His name is Hari, He who steals
away.

Sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha Bhagavān reveals His tattva in
the hearts of those who chant and remember His names.
Simultaneously, He destroys the ignorance that lies
there. That Prabhu is remembered by the name Hari.

He is called Hari because He removes the threefold
miseries of the moving and non-moving living entities.
The minds of worldly people are captivated by hearing
and chanting His transcendental qualities. Therefore,
His name is Hari. His sweet beauty captivates the minds
of millions of kāmadevas (Cupids). Thus the Prince of
Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is known as Hari. The vocative form of
Hari is Hare.

To fulfill the loving pleasure of rāsa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā
captivates the mind of Kṛṣṇa by Her form, qualities and
by the nourishment of Her prema. Thus, gentle persons
talk and sing about the hlādini-śakti of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrī Rādhā, by using the name Harā.
Harā is addressed as Hare.



KṛṣṇaóThe verb kṛṣ means all-attractive and ṇa means
all-blissful. When combined, they indicate the all-
attractive and blissful parabrahma, known by the name
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

That Śrī Govinda, whose body is eternal, full of
knowledge and bliss, who is primeval and the cause of
all causes, is known by the name Kṛṣṇa.

The son of King Nanda, who has lotus eyes and a dark
blue complexion, is the only source of bliss for the
residents of Gokula. He is referred to as Kṛṣṇa.



RāmaóŚaṅkarajī said to Pārvatī, “He Devī! By pronouncing
the first syllable of the word Rāma (rā) all sins leave
the body, and when one chants the syllable ma, the door
of the mouth closes so they cannot re-enter.

Yogīs meditate on para-tattva, the transcendental,
unlimited truth and the embodiment of pleasure. That
para-tattva paraṁ brahma is known as Rāma.

The predominating deity (adhiṣṭhātṛ-deva) of all rasa
filled pastimes, the crest-jewel of the clever, rasika-
śekhara Śrī Kṛṣṇa eternally enjoys with Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
Thus, He is referred to as Rāma.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa attracts the mind of Śrī Rādhikā and thus

                            27
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

enjoys performing pastimes with Her. He is, therefore,
known as Rāma. In the Krama-dīpikā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa spoke to
Candramā, the moon. “Rādhā’s name is superior to
hundreds of My names. Even I do not know what benefit
awaits that person who always chants and remembers Śrī
Rādhā.”



Hareókṛṣṇasya mano haratīti harā rādhā, tasyāḥ
saṁbodhane he hare: Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who steals the mind
of Kṛṣṇa, is called Harā. The vocative of Harā is Hare.



Kṛṣṇaórādhāyā manaḥ karṣatīti kṛṣṇaḥtasya saṁbodhane
hekṛṣṇa: Kṛṣṇa means He who attracts the mind of Śrī
Rādhā. The address to Him is ‘He Kṛṣṇa!’



Hareókṛṣṇasya loka-lajjā-dhairyādi sarvaṁ haratīti harā
rādhā, tasyāh saṁbodhane hehare: Śrī Rādhikā causes
Kṛṣṇa to lose (harā) all His reputation as shy, sober,
patient and modest, etc. The address to Her is ‘He
Hare!’



Kṛṣṇaórādhāyā loka-lajjā-dhairyādi sarva-karṣatīti
kṛṣṇaḥ, tasya saṁbodhane hekṛṣṇa: He who attracts
Śrīmatī Rādhikā in such a way that She loses all Her
shyness and patience is called Kṛṣṇa. The address to Him
is ‘He Kṛṣṇa!’



Kṛṣṇaóyatra yatra rādhā tiṣṭhati gacchati vā tatra tatra
sā paśyati kṛṣṇo māṁ spṛśati, balāt kañcukādikaṁ sarvaṁ
haratīti kṛṣṇaḥ, tasya saṁbodhane he kṛṣṇa: Wherever
Śrīmatī Rādhikā stands or goes, She sees Śrī Kṛṣṇa
touching Her and forcibly attracting Her. For this
reason He is called Kṛṣṇa (the all-attractive) and
addressed ‘He Kṛṣṇa!’



Kṛṣṇaópunar harṣatāṁ gamayati vanaṁ karṣatīti kṛṣṇaḥ,
tasya saṁbodhane he kṛṣṇa: He gives pleasure to Śrī
Rādhā, who again ventures to the forest of Vṛndāvana,
being attracted irresistibly by the sound of His flute.
For this reason He is called Kṛṣṇa and addressed ‘He
Kṛṣṇa!’



Hareóyatra kṛṣṇo gacchati tiṣṭhati vā tatra tatra
paśyati rādhā mamāgre pārśve sarvatra tiṣṭhati viharati
iti harā rādhā, tasyāḥ saṁbodhane he hare: Śrī Kṛṣṇa
sees Rādhā next to Him wherever He stands or movesóin
every directionóand hence His consciousness becomes
captivated by Her. Therefore, She is called Harā. The
address to Her is ‘He Hare!’


                            28
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017



Hareópunas taṁ kṛṣṇaṁ harati sva-sthanam
abhisārayatītiharā rādhā, tasyāḥ saṁbodhane he hare: She
again steals away Kṛṣṇa to a secret rendezvous,
therefore, the address to Her is Harā. Harā changes to
Hare in the vocative case.



Hareókṛṣṇaṁ vanaṁ harati vanam āgamayatīti harā rādhā,
tasyāḥ saṁbodhane he hare: Śrī Rādhā forcibly takes
Kṛṣṇa to the forest groves of Vṛndāvana. Thus, Śrī
Rādhika is called Harā. The address to Her is ‘He Hare!’



Rāmaóramayati tāṁ narma-nirīkṣaṇādineti rāmaḥ, tasya
saṁbodhane he rāma: Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s playful smile, laughter
and glance create pleasure for Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and
therefore His name is Rāma. He is addressed ‘He Rāma!’



Hareótāt-kālikaṁ dhairyāvalaṁbanādikaṁ kṛṣṇasya haratīti
harā rādhā tasyāh sambodhane he hare: The association of
Śrī Rādhikā causes Kṛṣṇa to suddenly lose His composure.
Therefore, She is Harā. The address to Her is ‘He Hare!’



Rāmaócumbana-stanākarṣaṇālinganādibhiḥ ramate iti rāmaḥ
tasya saṁbodhane he rāma: by means of confidential
caresses, embraces, and so forth, Kṛṣṇa enjoys Śrī
Rādhā. The address to Him is ‘He Rāma!’



Rāmaópunas tāṁ puruṣocitāṁ kṛtvā ramayatīti rāmaḥ, tasya
saṁbodhane he rāma: Kṛṣṇa is He who enjoys conjugal
pastimes with His consort, Śrī Rādhā, by making Her play
the dominant role in love. He is thus called Rāma (the
enjoyer), and is addressed ‘He Rāma!’



Rāmaópunas tatra ramate iti rāmaḥ, tasya saṁbodhane he
rāma: Because He repeatedly enjoys pleasure, He is
called Rāma and is addressed ‘He Rāma!’



Hareópuna

rāsānte kṛṣṇasya mano hṛtvā gacchatīti harā rādhā,
tasyāḥ saṁbodhane he hare: As rāsa-līlā concludes, She
steals away Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mind and goes away. She is
therefore called Harā. She is addressed ‘He Hare!’



Hareórādhāyā mano hṛtvā gacchatīti hariḥ kṛṣṇaḥ, tasya
saṁbodhane he hare: Similarly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, at the
conclusion of rāsa-līlā also captures Śrī Rādhikā’s

                            29
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                         5/5/2017

mind. Thus He is called Hari. The address to Kṛṣṇa here
is ‘He Hare!’




Thus ends the commentary on the mahā-mantra by Śrī
Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī




Śrī-Raghunātha-Gosvāmi-kṛtā mahāmantra-vyākhyā



A Confidential Commentary on the Mahā-mantra composed by
Śrila Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī




ekadā kṛṣṇa-virahād

dhyāyantī priya-saṅgamam

mano-bāṣpa-nirāsārthaṁ

jalpatīdaṁ muhur muhuḥ

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma

rāma rāma hare hare



he hareó sva-nāma-śravaṇa-mātreṇa sva-mādhuryeṇa ca mac-
ceto harasi.

tatra hetuḥ: he kṛṣṇa iti. kṛṣ-śabdasya sarvārthaḥ ṇaś
ca ānanda-svarūpa iti svārthe ṇaḥ. sac-cid-ānanda-
svarūpaka iti svīyena sārva-dik-paramānandena
sārvādhika-paramānandena vā pralobhya iti bhāvaḥ.

tataś ca he hareó vaṁśī-vādane mama dhairya-lajjā-
gurubhayādikam api harasi.



tataś ca he kṛṣṇaó svāṅga-saurabheṇa māṁ sva-gṛhebhyo
vṛndavanaṁ pratyākarṣasi.

tataś ca he kṛṣṇaó vanaṁ praviṣṭāyā me kañcukīṁ
sahasaivāgatya karṣasi.




                            30
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

tataś ca he kṛṣṇaó svāṅga-lāvaṇyena sarvādhikānandena ca
māṁ pralobhya mat kucau karṣasi (nakhair ākarṣasi).

tataś ca he hareó sva-bāhu-nibaddhāṁ māṁ puṣpa-śayyāṁ
prati harasi.

tataś ca he hareó tatra niveśitāyā me antarīyam api
balād harasi.

tataś ca he hareóantarīya-vasana-haraṇa-miṣeṇātma-
viraha-pīḍāṁ sarvam eva harasi.



tataś ca he rāma ó svacchandaṁ mayi ramase.

tataś ca he hareó yad avaśiṣṭaṁ me kiñcid vāmyam āsīt
tad api harasi.

tataś ca he rāmaó māṁ ramayasi svasmin puruṣāyitām api
karoṣi.

tataś ca he rāmaó ramaṇīya-cūḍā-maṇe tava navīna-vaktra-
mādhuryam api niḥśaṅkaṁ tad-ātmānaṁ tava rāmaṇīyakaṁ
man-nayanābhyāṁ dvābhyām evāsvādyate iti bhāvaḥ.



tataś ca he rāmaó ramaṇaṁ ramaḥ ramasya bhāvaḥ rāmaḥ; he
rāma! tadā tvaṁ sākṣād ramaṇa-vid eva bhāva-
rūpo'prākṛta-kandarpa eva bhavasi, athavā na kevalaṁ
ramaṇa-rūpeṇāpi ramaṇa-kartu ramaṇa-prayojakaḥ kintu
tad-bhāva-rūpā rati-mūrtir iva tvaṁ bhavasīti bhāvaḥ.

tataś ca he hareómac-cetanā-mṛgīm api harasi, mām
ānanda-mūrcchitāṁ karoṣīti bhāvaḥ.



yato he hareó siṁha-svarūpa! tad api tvaṁ rati-karmaṇi
siṁha iva mahā-prāgalbhyaṁ prakaṭayasīti bhāvaḥ

evaṁ bhūtena tvayā preyasā viyuktāham kṣaṇam api kalpa-
koṭim iva yāpayituṁ kathaṁ prabhāvāmīti svayam eva
vicārasya ii nāma ṣoḍaśakasyābhiprāyaḥ. tataś ca
nāmabhiś cumbakair iva kṛṣṇaḥ kṛṣṇayā sahasaivākṛṣto
milita-paramānanda eva. tasyāḥ sva-sakhīnāṁ tat-
parivāra-vargasya tad-bhāva-sādhakānām arvācīnānām api
śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇau mānasaṁ saṁpūrayataḥ.



Thus ends the commentary on the mahā-mantra

by Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī




Commentary by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura




                            31
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017



He Hare!ómac-cittaṁ hṛtvā bhava-bandhān mocaya: He Hare!
Please captivate my mind and release me from material
existence.



He Kṛṣṇa!ómac-cittam ākarṣa: He Kṛṣṇa! Please attract my
restless mind towards You.



He Hare!ósva-mādhuryeṇa mac-cittaṁ hara: He Hare!
Captivate my mind with Your spontaneous mādhurya.



He Kṛṣṇa!ósva-bhakta-dvārā bhajana-jñāna-dānena mac-
cittaṁ śodhaya: He Kṛṣṇa! Please make my mind pure with
the knowledge of bhajana as given by Your bhaktas who
understand the science of bhakti-tattva.



He Kṛṣṇa!ónāma-rūpa-guṇa-līlādiṣu man-niṣṭhāṁ kuru: He
Kṛṣṇa! Please make me have staunch faith in Your name,
form, qualities and pastimes.



He Kṛṣṇa!órucir bhavatu me: He Kṛṣṇa! May I develop a
taste for Your name, form, qualities and pastimes.



He Hare!ónija-sevā-yogyaṁ māṁ kuru: He Hare! Please make
me qualified to serve You.



He Hare!ósva-sevām ādeśaya: He Hare! Please make me
qualified and order me to serve You.



He Hare!ósva-preṣṭhena saha svābhīṣṭa-līlāṁ śrāvaya: He
Hare! Please make me hear of Your sweet pastimes with
Your dearmost bhaktas.



He Rāma!ópreṣṭhayā saha svābhīṣṭa-līlāṁ māṁ śrāvaya: He
Rāma! Rādhikā-Rāmaṇa! Make me hear Your most cherished
pastimes and Your sweet affectionate voice in Goloka in
the company of Your beloved Rādhikā.



He Hare!ósva-preṣṭhena saha svābhīṣṭa-līlāṁ māṁ darśaya:
He Hare! Śrīmatī Rādhike! Please give me darśana of Your
dearest pastimes with You and Your beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



                            32
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017


He Rāma!ó preṣṭhayā saha svābhīṣṭa-līlāṁ māṁ darśaya: He
Rāma! Rādhikā-Rāmaṇa! Please reveal to me Your pastimes
with Your beloved.



He Rāma!ónāma-rūpa-guṇa-līlā-smaraṇādiṣu māṁ yojaya: He
Rāma! You who perform pastimes with Your eternal
associates, please engage me in remembering Your name,
form, qualities and pastimes.



He Rāma!ótatra māṁ nija-sevā-yogyaṁ kuru! O You who give
pleasure to Your eternal associates, Śyāma! Please make
me qualified to serve You while remembering Your name,
form, qualities and pastimes.



He Hare!ómāṁ svāngī kṛtya ramasva: He Hare! Please
accept this fallen, wicked person and play with me as I
deserve.



He Hare!ómayā saha ramasva: He Hare! Please perform Your
transcendental sports with me. This is my only prayer at
Your lotus feet.

(Śrī Caitanya-Śikṣāmṛta)




Thus ends the commentary of Śrī Saccidānanda
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



Commentary in the Śrī Pada-kalpataru




nara harināma antare acchu bhāvaha

habe bhava-sāgare pāra

dhara re śravaṇe nara harināma sādare

cintāmaṇi uha sāra




“O brother! When you have internally realized this hari-
nāma, you can cross the ocean of saṁsāra. When this
hari-nāma is very respectfully placed in the ear, it can
be drunk, heard and absorbed because its very essence is

                            33
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

cintāmaṇi."




yadi kṛta-pāpi ādare kabhu mantraka

rāja śravaṇe kare pāna

śrī kṛṣna caitanya bale haya tacchu durgama

pāpa tāpa saha trāṇa




“Even if sinful persons or kings drink śrī-nāma by
respectfully hearing this mantra, then Caitanya
Mahāprabhu says that all of their sins will be
vanquished along with all the miseries in the burning
fire of this material world (adhyātmika, adhibhautika
and adhidaivika)."




karaha gaura-guru-vaisṇava-āśraya

laha nara harināma-hāra

saṁsāre nāma lai sukṛti haiyā tare

āpāmara durācāra




“O brother! Accepting the shelter of Gaura, Guru, and
Vaiṣṇavas, take this garland of Śrī Hari-nāma. Even the
most wretched and sinful people in this saṁsāra will
become purified through chanting hari-nāma."



ithe kṛta-viṣaya-tṛṣṇa pahuñ-nāma-hārā

yo dhāraṇe śrama-bhāra

ku-tṛṣna jagadānanda kṛta-kalmaṣa

kumati rahala kārāgāra



“But one who having abandoned Śrī Bhagavān-Nāma and
desirous of gratifying the senses, carries a heavy
burden of labour. Thus the lusty, sinful and evil-minded
Jagadānanda remains within this prison."



                            34
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017


(Śrī Pada-kalpataru Gaurapada-taraṅgiṇī,

Taraṅga 1, uchhvāsa 2, pada 59)




The Glories of Śrī Hari-Nāma




One can find an abundance of glorification of Śrī
Bhagavān’s name in śāstra. A portion of those glories
will be mentioned here.




Nāma-Svarūpa



nāma cintāmaniḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrnaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

‘bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ

(Śrī-Bhakti-Rasāmṛta-Sindhu Eastern Division, 2nd Wave
108)



“Because there is no difference between nāma (Kṛṣṇa’s
name) and nāmī (Kṛṣṇa), Śrī kṛṣṇa-nāma is therefore
cintāmaṇi-svarūpa (the original wish-fulfilling gem),
and is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself who is caitanya-rasa-vigraha
(the fully conscious form of rasa). Śrī Nāma is
complete, beyond māyā and eternally liberated.”




Nāma Bestows All Perfection in Kali-Yuga



kaler doṣa-nidhe rājann

asti hy eko mahān guṇaḥ

kīrtanād eva kṛṣṇasya

mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ vrajet

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 12.3.51)


                              35
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017



“My dear King, although Kali-yuga is an ocean of faults,
there is still one good quality in this age. Simply by
chanting the hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, one can become free
from material bondage and achieve the shelter of
Bhagavān.”



kṛte yad-dhyāyato viṣṇuṁ

tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ

dvāpare paricaryāyāṁ

kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 12.3.52)



“The result which is attained in Satya-yuga by
meditating on Śrī Bhagavān (dhyāna), in Tretā-yuga by
performing opulent yajñas, and in Dvāpara-yuga by
performing arcana, is easily available in Kali-yuga by
performing hari-nāma-kīrtana.”



kali-kāle nāma-rūpe kṛṣṇa-avatāra

nāma haite haya sarva-jagat-nistāra

(Śrī-Caitanya-caritāmṛta Ādi 17.22)



“In Kali-yuga, the avatāra of Śrī Kṛṣṇa comes in the
form of His name. Simply by chanting this name, the
entire world can be delivered.”



nāma vinā kali-kāle nāhi āra dharma

sarva-mantra-sāra nāma ei śāstra-marma

(Śrī-Caitanya-caritāmṛta Ādi 7.74)



“In Kali-yuga there is no other sādhana but to chant
hari-nāma. It is the essence of all Vedic mantras. This
is the essential teaching of all śāstras on nāma-
tattva.”




The Glories of Nāma as Described by the Ancient Ācāryas



                              36
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017


aṁhaḥ saṅharate 'khilaṁ sakṛd

udayād eva sakala-lokasya

taraṇir iva timira-jaladhim

jayati jagan-mangalaṁ harer nāma

(Śrī-Padyāvalī, śloka 16, composed by Śrīla Śrīdhara
Svāmī )



“All glories to hari-nāma, which is auspicious for the
entire world! Just as the rising sun dissipates all
darkness, if hari-nāma rises just once, it can destroy
all of a person’s sins.”



ākṛṣṭiḥ kṛta-cetasāṁ sumanasām ucchāṭanaṁ cāṁhasām

ā-caṇḍālam amūka-loka-sulabho vaśyaś ca mukti-śriyaḥ

no dīkṣāṁ na ca sat-kriyāṁ na ca puraścaryāṁ manāg
īkṣate

mantro 'yaṁ rāsanā-spṛg eva phalati śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmātmakaḥ

(Śrī-Padyāvalī 18)



“The minds of those who are guṇātīta (beyond the three
modes) are attracted to nāma.Nāma eradicates all sins.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa nāma-svarūpa (Kṛṣṇa in the form of the mahā-
mantra) is easily accessible to those who are lower than
cānḍālas and also captivates the opulence of mukti. It
awards results even by its initial contact with the
tongue. It does not consider whether or not a person has
taken dīkṣā, performed pious activity, or taken vows of
austerity.”




The Glories of Chanting Śrī Nāma Exceed the Glories of
Direct Brahma Realization



yad-brahma-sākṣāt-kṛti-niṣṭhayāpi

vināśam āyāti vinā na bhogaiḥ

apaiti nāma-sphuraṇena tat te

prārabdha-karmeti virauti vedaḥ

(Śrī-Kṛṣṇa-Nāmāṣṭakam 4,

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī)

                              37
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                       5/5/2017




“O nāma! The Vedas loudly declare that a bhakta’s
fructified sinful reaction (prārabdha-karma), which
cannot be eliminated even by resolute meditation on
impersonal brahma, is at once mitigated by Your
appearance on the tongue even without his undergoing any
suffering.”



The Superiority of Śrī Nāma-Kīrtana



agha-cchit-smaraṇaṁ viṣṇor

bahv-āyāsena sādhyate

oṣṭha-spandana-mātreṇa

kīrttanas tu tato varam

(Śrī-Hari-Bhakti-Vilāsa, 11/236

Vaiṣṇava-Cintāmaṇi-Vākya)



“Although Śrī-Viṣṇu-smaraṇam destroys all sins, it can
only be fully realized after a person has endeavoured
with great difficulty over a prolonged period of time.
Viṣṇu-kīrtanam however is superior because when Śrī
Viṣṇu-nāma merely vibrates upon a person's lips, (ie.
nāmābhāsa), he becomes liberated from bondage to the
cycle of saṁsāra.”




The Superiority of Śrī Nāma-Kīrtana Compared to Dhyāna &
Pūjā



jayati jayati nāmānanda-rūpaṁ murārer

viramita-nija-dharma-dhyāna-pūjādi-yatnam

katham api sakṛd āttaṁ mukti-daṁ prāṇināṁ yat

paramamṛtam ekaṁ jīvanaṁ bhūṣaṅaṁ me

(Śrī-Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam 1.1.9,

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī)



“All glories, all glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Murāri’s name,
the embodiment of divine bliss! It halts the cycle of
birth and death and relieves one of all painful

                             38
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

endeavours in practicing religion, meditation, charity,
deity worship and austerity. It awards liberation to one
who utters it even once. Kṛṣṇa-nāma stands alone as the
supreme nectar and sole treasure of my life.”



yena janma-śataiḥ pūrvāṁ

vāsudevaḥ samarcitaḥ

tan-mukhe hari-nāmāni

sadā tiṣṭhanti bhārata

(Śrī-Hari-Bhakti-Vilāsa 11. 237)



“O great descendant of Bharata! The name of Śrī Hari
will remain eternally on the lips of those who have
already performed arcana of Vāsudeva for hundreds of
births.”




Śrī Nāma is not Governed by Rules Regarding Time, Place
or Circumstance



na deśa-niyamo rājan

na kāla-niyamas tathā

vidyate nātra sandeho

viṣṇor nāmānukīrttane



kālo ‘sti dāne yajñe ca

snāne kālo ‘sti saj-jape

viṣṇuḥ sankīrttane kālo

nāsty atra pṛthivī-tale

(Śrī-Hari-Bhakti-Vilāsa 11. 206 )



“O King! It is stated unequivocally that time and place
are not considered in the performance of kīrtana of Śrī
Viṣṇu’s names. Such rules apply to giving in charity,
performing yajña, and chanting other types of japa. On
this earth planet, however, such considerations do not
apply to the performance of saṇkīrtana of Śrī Viṣṇu’s
names.”



                            39
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017


na deśa-niyamas tasmin

na kāla-niyamas tathā

nocchiṣṭādau niṣedho ‘sti

śrī-harer nāmni lubdhaka

(Śrī-Hari-Bhakti-Vilāsa 11. 202,

quoted from Viṣṇu-dharmottara)



“O Hunter! In the performance of Śrī Hari’s nāma-
kīrtana, there is no consideration of time and place nor
is there any prohibition with respect to being in an
unclean state due to eating, passing stool etc.



madhura-madhuram etan maṅgalaṁ maṅgalānāṁ

sakala-nigama-vallī-sat-phalaṁ cit-svarūpam

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛguvara nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa nāma

(Śrī-Hari-Bhakti-Vilāsa 11.234, quoted from Skanda-
Purāṇa)



“Śrī Kṛṣṇa-nāma is the sweetest of the sweet and the
most auspicious of all that is auspicious. It is the
flourishing creeper, the eternal, fully ripened fruit of
the Bhāgavata, and the embodiment of knowledge, cit-
śakti. O best of the Bhṛgu dynasty! Even if someone
chants the holy name only once, with faith or
indifference (helā), he is immediately delivered from
this ocean of birth and death!”




Śrī Nāma-Saṅkīrtana is the Sādhana and the Sādhya for
Everyone



etan nirvidyamānānām

icchatām akuto-bhayam

yogināṁ nṛpa nirṇītaṁ

harer nāmānukīrtanam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.1.11)



                             40
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017


“O King! Previous ācāryas have declared the following to
be siddhānta: chanting and remembering the name of Śrī
Hari again and again is the primary sādhana and sādhya
for those persons who are indifferent to sense pleasure,
for the exclusively dedicated bhaktas, for those who
desire liberation, promotion to heaven, etc. and for the
self satisfied yogīs.”




Śrī Hari-Nāma by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura




The ocean of material existence is very difficult to
cross without the mercy of Parameśvara. It is not only
difficult, but impossible. Even though the jīvas are
superior to matter, they are by nature weak and
dependent on Bhagavān as their sole protector, guardian
and saviour. The jīva is aṇu-caitanya, an atomic
conscious being. He is dependent on and is the servant
of Parama-Caitanya Bhagavān. In other words, Parama-
Caitanya Bhagavān is the shelter for all jīvas. This
world of matter is created by māyā and, therefore, the
position of the jīva is the same as that of an offender
who is in prison. The jīva wanders throughout saṁsāra as
a result of his opposition to Bhagavān. Those jīvas who
are opposed to Bhagavān are called baddha-jīvas
(conditioned souls) because they are chained by māyā,
whereas those jīvas who follow Bhagavān are released
from māyā and are called mukta-jīvas (liberated souls).
This difference is due to the variagated conditions in
which the unlimited jīvas are situated. Hence, there are
two divisions, baddha-jīvas and mukta-jīvas.

By performing sādhana, the baddha-jīva attains the mercy
of Bhagavān thus he becomes capable of breaking the
powerful chains of māyā. After lengthy contemplation,
our great maharṣis have established three types of
sādhana: karma, jñāna and bhakti.

Varṇāśrama-dharma, tapasyā, yajña, dāna, vrata and yoga
are mentioned in śāstras as limbs of karma and their
results are clearly described. By deeply understanding
the distinct nature of these results, the primary
effects of executing karma are revealed. They are: 1)
enjoyment on the earthly planets, 2) enjoyment in the
heavenly planets, 3) relief from disease and 4) the
knowledge that great fortune will arise by performing
good karma3. If we separate the fourth
effectóperformance of good karma will result in great
fortuneófrom the other three, it seems that the results
of enjoying the heavenly planets, enjoying the earthly
planets and curing disease, which the jīva acquires by
performing karma, are all perishable. They will be
destroyed in Śrī Bhagavān’s wheel of time. It is not
possible to become free from the bondage of māyā by
attaining these results. On the contrary, the desire to
execute more karma will increase, and this will lead to
further bondage to māyā. The results of good karma are

                            41
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

negligible if that karma is not performed in accordance
with the rules and regulations of śāstra.



In this regard, Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (1.2.8) states:



dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam



“The main purpose of varṇāśrama-dharma is to simplify
the life of a person who is performing his natural
occupational duty, so that he has sufficient time to
hear hari-kathā. However, if an attraction for hari-
kathā is not inspired, then all the religious activities
he performs in accordance with varṇāśrama-dharma will be
so much useless labour.” The ocean of material existence
cannot be crossed by karma. I will explain this briefly:

Jñāna is also considered a sādhana by which a high goal
is achieved. The result of jñāna is ātma-śuddhi
(purification of the soul). Ātmā (soul) is beyond
matter, but when a jīva forgets this reality and takes
shelter of matter, he becomes lost on the path of karma.

By discussing jñāna, a person can understand that he is
not composed of matter but is transcendental. This type
of jñāna is generally called naiṣkarmya (self-
realization). In the stage of naiṣkarmya, the jīva is
only able to relish a limited amount of bliss (ānanda).
This stage is also called ātmārāma (in which one finds
pleasure in the self, ātmā, alone). But when the jīva
begins to realize his eternal nature, and starts to
relish his relationship with Kṛṣṇa, the stage of
naiṣkarmya, or ātmārāma, becomes completely
insignificant. For this reason Devarṣi Nārada states in
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (1.5.12):



naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitaṁ

na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam



“Although knowledge of self-realization is free from all
material affinity, it is not pleasing to the heart if
devoid of a conception of the infallible Personality of
Godhead.”



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.7.10) also mentions:


                              42
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017



ātmārāmāś ca munayo

nirgranthā apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim

itthaṁ-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ



“Parama-Caitanya Hari possesses one extraordinary
quality: He attracts all varieties of persons who are
ātmārāma and are thus free from all kinds of material
bondage, to engage in sevā to Him.”



Therefore, jñāna and karma can only be called limbs of
sādhana when karma, by its effect, provides great
fortune to perform increasingly improved karma and then
jñāna renounces useless karma. This performance of good
karma and the rejection of impersonal jñāna will lead us
to bhakti-sādhana. In and of themselves, jñāna and karma
are not accepted as limbs of sādhana except when they
lead us to bhakti. It is then that they have some
significance. Therefore, only bhakti is called sādhana.
When karma and jñāna lead us to bhakti, they are
considered a sādhana. Otherwise, bhakti, by its very
nature, is the exclusive svarūpa (form) of sādhana.



The decision of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.20) clearly
explains this:



na sādhayati māṁ yogo

na sāṅkhyaṁ dharma uddhava

na svādhyāyas tapas tyāgo

yathā bhaktir mamorjitā



“He Uddhava! Karma-yoga, sāṅkhya-yoga or varṇāśrama-
dharma cannot please Me, nor can study of the Vedas,
austerity or renunciation. Only the performance of pure
bhakti actually pleases Me.”

Performing bhakti is the only way to please Bhagavān.
There is no other means. There are nine kinds of
sādhana-bhakti: śravaṇa (hearing), kīrtana (chanting),
smaraṇa (remembering), arcana (worshipping), vandana
(praying), pāda-sevanam (offering obeisances), dāsya
(service), sakhya (friendship) and ātmā-nivedana (full
surrender). Śravaṇa, kīrtana and smaraṇa are the primary
limbs of sādhana. Their sādhya or object should be Śrī
Bhagavān’s nāma, rūpa, guṇa and līlā (His name, form,
qualities and pastimes). And of these four, śrī nāma is

                             43
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

the original seed (bīja-svarūpa). Thus, according to
śāstra, hari-nāma is the root of all worship.



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

(Śrī-Bṛhan-Nāradīya-Purāna 3.8.126)



“In Kali-yuga there is no deliverance for the jīva
except by the chanting of hari-nāma.”



By the word kalau it is to be understood that although
there is never a time when śrī hari-nāma is not the sole
means for deliverance, in the age of Kali since the
various other mantras and practices have become weak, it
is especially appropriate to take shelter of this all
powerful hari-nāma.



In relation to hari-nāma Śrī Padma-Purāṇa states:



nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

‘bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ



Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī writes in his commentary on the above
śloka:



ekam eva sac-cid-ānanda—rasādi-rūpaṁ

tattvaṁ dvidhāvirbhūtam ity arthaḥ



“Śrī-kṛṣṇa-tattva is the non-dual form of eternity,
knowledge and bliss (advaya-sac-cid-ānanda-svarūpa).” He
has appeared in two forms: (1) nāmī, the form of śrī-
kṛṣṇa-vigraha and (2) nāma, the form of His name."

The essence of tattva is that Kṛṣṇa is sarva-śaktimān,
the possessor of all potencies. The splendour of the
supreme puruṣa is the splendour of His śakti. Kṛṣṇa’s

                            44
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                         5/5/2017

śakti takes shelter of Him, and without Kṛṣṇa’s śakti no
one can understand Him. The effect of śakti manifests
darśana of Kṛṣṇa’s form. The blissful effect of kṛṣṇa-
nāma advertises itself. Thus kṛṣṇa-nāma is cintāmaṇi-
svarūpa, kṛṣṇa-svarūpa and caitanya-rasa-svarūpa. Just
by chanting Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, kṛṣṇa-rasa rises
spontaneously in the core of the heart. Nāma is complete
in itself. This means that it does not depend on the
construction of mantras, such as kṛṣṇāya or nārāyaṇāya,
which are formed by a combination of names. Nāma is
always transcendentalónot lifeless like material
syllables. Only nāma is caitanya-rasa. Nāma is ever
liberated. It cannot be produced by the material tongue.
Only a person who has tasted the mellow of nāma can
understand this explanation. One who imagines that nāma
is lifeless is not eligible to relish caitanya-rasa, nor
is he satisfied with this explanation.

A person may say that nāma, which we continuously chant,
is dependent on material syllables, so how can it be
said that nāma is eternally liberated and not a material
object? Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī responds to this adverse
opinion as follows:



ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ

(Śrī-Bhakti-Rasāmṛta-Sindhu,

Eastern Division 2/109)



“The material senses can perceive a material object.
Kṛṣṇa-nāma is transcendental, therefore, it can never be
perceived by the material senses. The nāma that
initially manifests on the tongue is only a result of a
sphūṛtióa pulsating of the transcendental senses of the
soul. But at the time that the soul's transcendental
(aprākṛta) tongue utters kṛṣṇa-nāma, the parama-tattva
appears in person upon their material (prākṛta) tongues
and begins to dance. As aprākṛta-rasa pervades the
senses the bhakta laughs out of bliss (ānanda), weeps
and laments out of affection (sneha) and dances out of
love (prīti). In this way by means of the tongue śrī
kṛṣṇa-nāma-rasa pervades throughout.”



The nāma practiced during sādhana is but chaya-nāma, a
shadow of nāma or nāmābhāsa (chanting which is covered
by clouds of ignorance and anarthas). It is not the real
name. Continuous chanting of nāmābhāsa will eventually
develop into a taste for aprākṛta-nāma. Examples of this
are evident in the lives of Vālmīki and Ajāmila.

The jīva has no taste for nāma because of his offences.
When the jīva chants kṛṣṇa-nāma without offence, the
caitanya-rasa-vigraha (the fully conscious reservoir of
all pleasure) transcendental śrī hari-nāma manifests
Himself within his heart. At that time his heart becomes

                            45
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                       5/5/2017

joyful, streams of tears flow from his eyes, and
symptoms of sāttvika ecstasy appear in his body. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (2.3.24) thus states:



tad aśma-sāraṁ hṛdayaṁ batedaṁ

yad-gṛhyamāṇair hari-nāma-dheyaiḥ

na vikriyetātha yadā vikāro

netre jalaṁ gātra-ruheṣu harṣaḥ



“When a jīva chants hari-nāma, the following symptoms
manifest: he experiences a change of heart, tears flow
from his eyes and his bodily hairs stand erect. When,
despite chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma, a person does not
experience any of these symptoms, it is to be understood
that his heart has become very hard due to offences.”




The primary duty of a sādhaka is to chant hari-nāma
without offence. It is, therefore, necessary to know how
many types of offences there are, and in this way one
can save himself from committing them.



Śāstra mentions ten offences in relation to hari-nāma:




1. To blaspheme devotees and saintly persons.



2. To consider demigods like Lord Śiva to be equal to
Bhagavān or independent of Him.



3. To disobey Śrī Guru, who reveals the truth about
hari-nāma.



4. To criticise sat-śāstra, which describes the glories
of hari-nāma.



5. To consider the glories of hari-nāma to be an
exaggeration.




                              46
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

6. To consider the meanings of hari-nāma revealed in
śāstra to be imaginary, in other words to consider the
names kṛṣṇa, rāma etc. to be a product of imagination.



7. To commit sinful activities on the strength of
chanting hari-nāma.



8. To equate chanting of hari-nāma with materially
auspicious activities recommended in the karma-kāṇḍa
sections of the Vedas.



9. To instruct faithless persons on the glories of hari-
nāma.



10. To not have faith in śrī kṛṣṇa-nāma despite hearing
His glories.



1) A person commits an offence to hari-nāma if he
disbelieves in the saintly bhaktas and blasphemes the
mahājanas, whose characters are spotless. Thus, one who
accepts hari-nāma must first reject with his whole heart
the tendency to disrespect or disregard any Vaiṣṇava. If
a doubt arises about the activity of a Vaiṣṇava, one
should try to inquire about the cause of that behaviour
and avoid criticising him. Our primary duty is to have
faith (śraddhā) in the sādhus.



2) To consider demigods like Lord Śiva to be
nondifferent from Bhagavān is nāmāparādha. Bhagavat-
tattva is one without a second. Demigods like Lord Śiva
are not independent of Śrī Bhagavān’s authority, nor are
they separate from Him. If a person honours demigods
like Śiva as guṇāvatāras or as bhaktas of Bhagavān, he
will not form the misconception that they are
independent of Him. Those who consider Mahādeva (Śivajī)
an independent and separate demigod worshipping him
alongside Viṣṇu, do not actually honour the true glory
of Mahādeva who is the greatest among Vaiṣṇavas. They
therefore become offensive to both Viṣṇu and Śiva. Those
who chant hari-nāma should reject this kind of
misconception.



3) To disobey Śrī Gurudeva is nāmāparādha. He who gives
the highest teachings of nāma-tattva should be accepted
as ācārya, and as that person who is most dear to
Bhagavān. One can attain firm faith in hari-nāma by
cultivating staunch bhakti for Śrī Guru.




                            47
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

4) The bona fide śāstras should never be blasphemed.
Revealed śāstras like the Vedas describe bhagavata-
dharma and detail the importance of śrī nāma. Therefore,
to blaspheme these śāstras is an offence to the holy
name. The glories of hari-nāma are described throughout
the Vedas.



vede rāmāyane caiva

puraṅe bhārate tathā

ādāv ante ca madhye ca

hariḥ sarvatra gīyate

(C.c. Ādi-līlā 7.131)



“How can a person develop love for hari-nāma if he
blasphemes bona fide śāstras? Some people consider the
śāstras’ descriptions of the importance of hari-nāma to
be simply praise. It is nāmāparādha to chant hari-nāma
with such an attitude, and those who do so will never
achieve any tangible result. They conclude that śāstra
falsely praises the glories of hari-nāma, as it falsely
praises karma-kāṇḍa just so that people will develop a
taste in it. Those who think like this are unfortunate.
On the other hand, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.1.11) describes
the faith of fortunate persons:



etan nirvidyamānānām

icchatām akuto-bhayam

yogināṁ nṛpa nirṇītaṁ

harer namānukīrtanam



“A yogī thinks that by obtaining detachment from the
world, he can become free from all fear, and concludes
that his wholesale duty is to chant hari-nāma. Persons
who have such faith can achieve the result of hari-
nāma.”



5) Some people do not understand the difference between
nāmābhāsa and nāma. They believe that nāma is only a
combination of syllables that will definitely grant
results whether one has faith or not. They use the life
and character of Ajāmila as an example, as well as
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.2.14):



sāṅketyaṁ pārihāsyaṁ vā


                            48
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

stobhaṁ helanam eva vā

vaikuṇṭha-nāma-grahaṇam

aśeṣāgha-haraṁ viduḥ



“One who chants hari-nāma is immediately freed from the
reactions to unlimited sins, even if he chants
indirectly (to indicate something else), jokingly, for
musical entertainment, or neglectfully. This is
concluded by all the learned scholars of the śāstras.”



6) Previously hari-nāma has been described as caitanya-
rasa-vigraha, which cannot be perceived by the material
senses. This proves that it is not possible to achieve
the results of chanting when one commits nāmāparādha. He
who chants without faith does not achieve the result of
chanting; rather, within a few days he attains some
faith in nāma. Faithless persons who believe that nāma
is a limb of karma-kāṇḍa propagate that nāma is only a
material syllable and, therefore, equal to other names.
They are actually conditioned souls and nāmāparādhīs.
Vaiṣṇavas diligently endeavour to avoid this offence.



7) Some people believe that by taking shelter of hari-
nāma, they have attained a cheap remedy for the results
of all their sins. With this idea they think that they
can steal, perform acts of fraud, act illicitly, and
then chant hari-nāma to eradicate all their misdeeds. A
person who believes this is certainly a nāmāparādhī
(offender to nāma). One who has once tasted the
transcendental mellows of hari-nāma will never again
become attached to temporary material activities.



8) Some believe in pious activities (karma), such as
performing yajña, giving in charity, behaving according
to dharma, and visiting holy places. They also include
the chanting of nāma as a pious activity, therefore,
they are nāmāparādhīs. Nāma is always transcendental,
whereas all pious activities are material. Thus pious
activities are foreign to nāma. Anyone who considers
nāma to be equivalent to pious activities becomes
indifferent to nāma and cannot relish its mellows (nāma-
rasa). There is a difference between diamonds and glass.
Similarly, there is a vast difference between hari-nāma
and pious activity.



9) One who instructs faithless persons about hari-nāma
or gives them the mantra is also a nāmāparādhī. It is
useless to give a string of pearls to a hog. The hog
will simply regard it as an insult or completely
disregard them. Similarly, it is extremely improper to
give instruction on nāma to a faithless person. It is
wise to first make an effort to develop his faith, and

                            49
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

then instruct him on hari-nāma. Those who act as guru
and give instructions on hari-nāma to faithless persons
will definitely fall downóbecause they are committing
nāmāparādha.



10) If a person does not have exclusive faith in hari-
nāma, even after hearing its extensive glories, and if
he is still attached to or dependent on sādhanas such as
karma, jñāna or yoga, then he is a nāmāparādhī.



In this way, hari-nāma will not arise unless we avoid
nāmāparādha.



Upon seeing the miseries of the jīva, the deliverer of
Kali-yuga, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, instructs us with a
compassionate heart:



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror iva sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

(Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka: 3)



“By thinking oneself to be even lower than straw in the
street, being more tolerant than a tree, not accepting
honour but giving honour to everyone, a jīva becomes
eligible to chant hari-nāma.”



The primary meaning of this śloka is that one is to
chant hari-nāma with a pure attitude. One who considers
himself more lowly and fallen than anyone else never
criticises sādhus nor disregards demigods like Lord
Śiva. He differentiates, but with respect. He never
disregards guru, blasphemes the bona fide śāstras, or
doubts the glories of hari-nāma. He never combines false
speculation with dry arguments to equate nirguṇa-brahma
with the name of 'Hari', nor does he make offences on
the strength of nāma. He does not accept pious
activities to be on an equal level with hari-nāma. He
never gives hari-nāma to faithless persons, and he
doesn’t have a scent of disbelief in nāma. He constantly
endeavours to be aloof from the ten types of
nāmāparādha. He never follows those who either ridicule
or are inimical to nāma. Even though he works for the
entire world, he does not possess any false ego of being
the enjoyer or the doer. Thinking himself to be a
servant of the world, he serves the whole world. When a
qualified person chants hari-nāma, the spiritual world

                            50
Hari-Nama_Maha-Mantra.txt                      5/5/2017

which is situated in the core of his heart radiates
transcendental light and thus keeps the darkness of māyā
far away. Therefore, O mahātmās, constantly perform
hari-nāma-kīrtana without offence. There is no shelter
for the jīvas other than hari-nāma.

Trying to save oneself from drowning in this ocean of
material existence by taking shelter of jñāna and karma
is as useless as taking shelter of a piece of straw to
cross a great ocean. Therefore, accepting the shelter of
the great ship of the mahā-mantra, cross this ocean of
material existence.



Table of Contents

Śrī Hari-Nāma Mahā-Mantra

The Sequence of the Mahā-Mantra

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the Mahā-Mantra

Commentaries on the Mahā-Mantra

The Glories of Śrī Hari-Nāma

Śrī Hari-Nāma by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura




                            51
