Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

Letters from America



Introduction

October 4th, 1965

August 21st , 1966

September 28th, 1966

October 26th, 1966

November 19th, 1966

December 15th, 1966

December 30th, 1966

April 14th, 1967

May 17th, 1967

May 24th, 1967

June 14th, 1967

July 1st, 1967

July 12th, 1967

July 14th, 1967

July 15th, 1967

October 22nd, 1968

About Srila Bhaktivedanta Swami Maharaja’s Letters




Introduction




“Our relationship is certainly based on spontaneous
love. That is why there is no chance of us forgetting
one another. By the mercy of Guru and Gaurānga may
everything be auspicious for you. This is my constant
prayer. From the first time I saw you I have been your
constant well-wisher. At his first sight of me, Śrīla
Prabhupāda also saw me with such love. It was in my very
first darśana of Śrīla Prabhupāda that I learned how to
love.”

(Excerpt from Śrīla Prabhupāda’s letter 28 September,
1966)

This booklet presents previously unpublished letters
written by Śrīla Prabhupāda during his first years in

                           1
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

America. They are parts of a long correspondence between
Śrīla Prabhupāda and his śikṣā disciple and friend Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, a disciple of
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s godbrother and sannyāsa guru, Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. These letters
are only a few of over two hundred that Śrīla Prabhupāda
wrote, mostly in Bengali and Hindi, to Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja between 1965 and 1977. They were
preserved in a separate folder which was just recently
located. The Butler, Pennsylvania entry is the first
letter on record that Śrīla Prabhupāda sent from
America.

This is the first of three publications which depict
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s association with other Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava devotees. Letters from America portrays Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s affectionate and candid relationship with
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, which is not widely
known. It reveals the service and support that Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja has offered for many years to
his śikṣā-guru. This book offers vintage historical
documents, as well as excerpts from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārājaṣ lectures and interviews. They concern
explanations of the letters and his friendship with
Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī: My Śikṣā Guru and Priya
Bandhu contains Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s special
memories of Śrīla Prabhupāda since their first meeting
in 1957. Included are additional documents and many of
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s insights about Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s preaching mission. Additional historical
documents and photographs are included as well. The
third volume entitled Our Śrīla Prabhupāda: A Friend to
All presents remembrances by other Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
contemporaries who had Śrīla Prabhupāda’s association.
We hope that this valuable new material will enliven the
hearts of all of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s followers, helping
us to increase our understanding of his transcendental
personality, pastimes and teachings.

The editors



Letters from America




October 4th, 1965




Tridandi Goswāmī c/o Gopal P. Agarwal

A.C. Bhaktivedānta 415 North Main Street Apt. 111

Swāmī BUTLER, Pennsylvania

U.S.A D/4.10.65


                             2
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,



Please accept my daṇḍavats, and also convey my daṇḍavats
to Muni Mahārāja and all of the other Vaiṣṇavas.

By the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda, I have had so much
work to do since I came to the West that although I was
thinking to write you a letter, up until now I could not
write. I came to stay here for one month, but if I can
stay here longer, the work will be done well. Here, they
are naturally attracted to Christianity, but they also
like to listen to me. Since I came here, I have been
lecturing every day either in a church, school, college,
club, or society. Their English is a little difficult
for me to understand because they pronounce words
differently, and our pronunciation of English is
difficult for them to understand. But the work has not
stopped because of this. They don’t dislike my English.

In the Butler Eagle Newspaper, which is one of the
largest publications, they like my English, and together
with my photograph they have printed this article: “In
Fluent English Devotee of Hindu Cult Explains Commission
To Visit West – A slight brown man in faded orange
drapes wearing white bathing shoes stepped out of a
compact car yesterday and into Butler YMCA to attend a
meeting. He is A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī, a messenger
from India to the peoples of the West. A Hindu by faith,
the learned teacher has translated Biblical literature
such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam into English from ancient
Sanskrit. He is now fulfilling a mission given to him by
his spiritual master to enlighten English speaking
people about their relationship with God.”

I have explained in detail a short life history. Under
my photograph, I wrote (in large letters): AMBASSADOR OF
BHAKTI YOGA “Chanting the holy name of God is among the
religious practices of A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī, who
arrived on Monday for a month’s stay in the Butler area
as a ‘Missionary in the West.’ Pictured in the apartment
of his sponsor in the United States, Gopal Agarwal, the
Swāmījī is residing in the YMCA, and cooking his own
meals at the Agarwal home. ‘Every culture has religion,’
he says. ‘We are all engaged in service of some sort;
the highest service is to the Supreme Lord.’ The
scholar-teacher has translated sixty volumes of Sanskrit
scripture into English. Now, seventy years old, the
appointed ‘missionary’ to the United States, was
educated in India up to a Bachelor of Arts. He became a
disciple in 1933, and received instructions until the
death of his leader in 1936. He has severed all family
ties, forsaking wife, children, and a business in
Calcutta, to follow his beliefs.”

To cross the Atlantic Ocean took ten days. This great
sea is usually full of storms and fog and is very
disturbing. But by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, there was no
disturbance. The captain of the ship, the main officer,
told me, “This kind of quiet Atlantic I have never seen
in my life.” I told them that this is only by Kṛṣṇa’s

                            3
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

mercy, nothing else. After the troublesome storm in the
Arabian Sea, I knew that if I had had to face a storm
like that again, I would die.

I am thinking that the preaching will be very good here.
I am lecturing – some days for an hour and some days for
one half-hour. The people of America are now tasting
some new thing. This is the first time I have come to a
foreign country, crossing twelve thousand miles. All
here are outcasts (not followers of the varṇāśrāma-
dharma system) yet I am never afraid to speak in front
of them. For the first time in my life I delivered a
speech in a church. The main thing is that I am alone
and I am in my old age. Because of this, crossing twelve
thousand miles in a ship, I became sick. I crossed the
Bay of Bengal, the Indian Ocean, the Arabian Sea, the
Red Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, and the Atlantic Ocean.
I passed through Asia, Europe and Africa. I crossed
these oceans and seas and became so sick. Due to my
request, they served me vegetarian meals on the ship,
yet I could not take them. I fasted continuously for
eight to ten days. The pitta (fire) increased so much in
my body thus I suffered terribly from colic pain.

Afterwards, the captain of the ship purchased an
electric stove for me in Port Said. I then cooked for
myself and took prasāda. If they hadn’t managed this
stove for me, maybe there would have been no possibility
of me reaching America. I could have died on the way,
but instead Kṛṣṇa mercifully brought me here. Why Kṛṣṇa
has brought me here, only He knows.

It is very expensive here. One room I found in the YMCA
has a weekly rent of fifty-five rupees. This is a very,
very expensive country. The laborers earn more than a
gentleman in India. They are paid eighty to eighty-five
or ninety rupees daily. Everybody has a motor car, since
all the offices and markets are very far away. Every
civilized person has one car, which costs ten thousand
rupees each. In India that same car would cost fifty
thousand rupees. People drive the cars themselves, they
have no paid drivers to do it for them. Nor do they keep
servants. There are lakhs and lakhs of motor cars. When
I came from New York to Butler, I saw that on two lanes,
for five hundred miles there was a solid line of cars.
There was no need of electric lights because there were
so many cars. At night in the city the shops are lit up
and it appears like daytime. There are so many bridges
and flyovers (overpasses) that the cars never need to
pass each other on narrow roads. Every motor car is
generally going not less than fifty miles per hour. Many
houses are twenty-five to thirty stories high. In this
neighborhood, there are cottages built on small plots.
The people are very civilized, but they are ugra (high-
tempered, not polite or humble).

Today in New York, the Pope came. On television,
everyone saw this. Television is an amazing thing. Just
staying in one room, they can watch how the whole world
is going on, and how they are all corresponding with
each other. “The days are passed in vain work and the
nighttimes in sleep.” Here people are generally non-
vegetarian. Without meat they can’t eat anything. I have
been taking muri (puffed rice) and peanuts with mustard

                           4
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

oil. Somewhere I found mustard oil. Everything is
available, but the price is so high. I purchased two
hundred and fifty grams of mustard oil for five rupees.
I had to travel to a shop twenty miles distance to get
it. If you want to come to this country, reply to me.



Swāmī Mahārāja




August 21st , 1966




26 Second Avenue Apt. B1

New York, NY 10003 USA

Phone: 212-674-7428

August 21st, 1966



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,



Please accept my daṇḍavats and also please take my
blessings.



I think that now you are forgetting me. I will never
forget you, but I see that you are forgetting me. How
are you? I hope you are all kuśala (well and happy) in
every way. Now I am staying at the above address. In the
middle of September I think that my visa will be
finished, so if the government allows I will try to
extend it. Very good preaching is going on here.
American boys are very beautifully chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa
Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare Hare Rāma Hare Rāma
Rāma Rāma Hare Hare. They are chanting loudly. They are
eagerly hearing Gītā and Bhāgavata-siddhānta. They are
also practicing sadācāra, leaving all bad habits. Also,
they are taking Mahāprabhu’s mahāprasāda. By doing this
with their arms upraised, I remember Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s prediction and become so pleased. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura wrote very hopefully, “When will
that day come when white people, that is Europeans and
Americans, join with all others and loudly sing
Mahāprabhu’s kīrtana.” So I can see that that day has
come.

I am trying my utmost for this. I am also praying for
your help and then it will be easier. So if I stay here
longer, if they give permission, please send me the
following things which I am listing here. You must buy
these things and pack them. Book them from Mathurā

                            5
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

Station. If you take this responsibility as I am writing
you, you must purchase and then pack. After receiving
your letter saying how many rupees are needed, then I
will send you the money.

1) One pair of metal Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deities. Arms length
(16”)

2) Very beautiful dresses, ornaments, crowns. Three
changes

3) Ten pairs of quality karatālas from Navadvīpa

4) Three good mṛdaṅgas

5) One taṁburā

6) One good quality harmonium

7) Fifty harināma mālās, neckbeads, and beadbags

8) One book of Sat-kriyā-sāra-dīpikā (by Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī)

If you can find any man who is expert in playing
mṛdaṅga, then if you want you can tell him to come here,
if he wants to come. If this man agrees to come, then
please give him my address. (See document A).

Let me know what is the cost for all of this, and also
what is the packing cost. I will send you that amount.
As soon as I get your letter, I shall send you the
money. So I hope this time also you will send all that I
am wanting and you will help my effort. I have taken so
much help from you, and I request that this time also
you will help me in this preaching work. I will be so
grateful to you. The vigrahas must be purchased either
in Mathurā or Vṛndāvana. If it is possible, the khola
(mṛdaṅga) and karatālas should be purchased from
Navadvīpa. Then in Calcutta my agent can ship it. I know
that this will be some trouble, but still I know that
you will send it. Receiving this letter, you must give
your reply also. I am well.



A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




(See document A)




September 28th, 1966




Tridandi Goswāmī c/o Gopal P. Agarwal

                           6
Letters_from_America.txt                         5/5/2017


A.C. Bhaktivedānta 415 North Main Street Apt 111

“Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga Jayatho”



By Air Mail Registered Post



International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness Inc.

TWENTY-SIX SECOND AVENUE, NEW YORK, N.Y. 10003

TELEPHONE: 674-7428

ACARYA: Swāmī A.C. Bhaktivedānta Sept. 28, 1966.

TRUSTEES:

(P.S. They are all my disciples and all their names are
now Vaiṣṇava names.)

Larry Bogart

James S. Greene

Carl Yeargans

Raphael Balsam

Robert Leftkowitz

Raymond Marais

Stanley Moskowitz

Michael Grant

Harvey Cohen



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,



I received your letter, dated 20.9.66 on time. Our
relationship is certainly based on spontaneous love.
That is why there is no chance of us forgetting one
another. By the mercy of Guru and Gaurāṅga may
everything be auspicious for you. This is my constant
prayer. From the first time I saw you I have been your
constant well-wisher. At his first sight of me Śrīla
Prabhupāda also saw me with such love. It was in my very
first darśana of Śrīla Prabhupāda that I learned how to
love. It is his boundless mercy that he has engaged an
unworthy person like me, in fulfilling some of his
desires. It is his causeless mercy to engage me in
preaching the message of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Raghunātha.




                              7
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

The preaching work is going very well here. I sent a
copy of my description of this along with the letter.
You may try to print it if you can, and you can copy it
and give this news to different newspapers. Here the
government is very cautious about preaching any other
religion except Christianity. Therefore I am ordered to
leave after staying for only one year. I am also ready
to return, but my disciples do not want me to go. They
are arranging to file a suit against this order of the
government. Five hundred dollars will be spent, about Rs
4000/-. They are prepared to spend that much money. The
above mentioned American gentlemen will hold a meeting
tonight, and within twenty-four hours they will arrange
a lawyer to be paid. So it seems I have to stay here
longer, to fulfill the desire of Śrīla Prabhupāda. Even
though they keep me in all kinds of comfort and
convenience, still my mind is anxious to return to
Vṛndāvana, and I am enthusiastic to see you all.

I am sending the description of the preaching along with
this letter. One check for Rs 1500/- is also included.
In the price list that you have given, the total comes
to Rs 1544/-, but by mistake you have written Rs 1080/-.
Anyway, I shall adjust more or less and send it to you
later. Everything needs to be packed properly and sent
to Calcutta or Cochin. Where to send, I shall write to
you in the next letter.

My room is locked in Delhi. If you or any of your
faithful preachers want to preach in Delhi, let me know.
If you want to work in Delhi, you can use that room and
preach. If you continue going to Delhi, then my
publication work can be taken care of, under your
observation.

You wrote to me, “You can engage me in any preaching
work in India according to by ability. I shall always be
ready to do so.” So I can preach whole-heartedly by your
good wishes.

Here, fifteen educated boys have accepted discipleship
from me (sishawatho). They have given up wine, meat,
intoxication, marijuana, tea, coffee, eggs etc., and are
honoring kṛṣṇa-prasāda given by me every day. They never
knew how to take dahl, capati, rice, milk, and fruits,
but now by eating such prasāda, they are quite happy and
are always attentively doing their service. Therefore,
when these young boys are fully ready, vast preaching
will take place in these Western countries through them.
I always remind them that I am old. “At any time I may
have to say namaskāra to Yamarāja, so you all try to
understand this Kṛṣṇa consciousness philosophy
properly.” I think that they are trying to take this up
properly. Otherwise, why would they spend Rs. 4000/- to
Rs 5000/- to file a suit to try to keep me here? Anyway,
by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa and your good wishes and
blessings, I feel no inconvenience. My health is also
good. My only concern is that due to my absence from
India my printing work is held up. Regarding this, if
you can supervise a little, then I will have no worry.
In Delhi, I have a householder disciple and there are
also one or two others, but they have no experience with
printing. If you can supervise, then Śrīman
Candraśekhara and his son Candra Mohana will help you. I

                           8
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

have a proper press, a supply of papers, and an
arrangement with the officials, but no one to look after
it. Let me know your opinion as soon as you receive my
letter. There is a press in Mathurā, but it is not as
convenient as Delhi. The books could be printed in
America. The final printing is very good, but very
expensive. It is also difficult to bring money from
India, so the printing has to be done there. There is no
doubt about it.

What you have heard about the temple is true. Sir
Padampat from Kanpur is ready to spend as much as
required to make a Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa temple in New York. But
it was not possible for the currency exchange with the
government of India. Half of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatams I
brought with me are distributed. Here, the high-ranking
people consider Bhagavān’s devotees to be insane. In the
beginning I tried to associate with them. I became
acquainted with the secretary of the governor and
others; but seeing their demoniac nature I have focused
my attention on the middle class – especially toward
young and educated. Here the young educated sampradāya
are disgusted with Western civilization. They are being
ruined by taking marijuana and associating with women.
The government does not care for them. They are sent to
the Vietnam War by force. The political situation here
is not good. This means that their future is not very
bright. Because of this condition, Śrīman Mahāprabhu has
come to this country. I am trying to give them the dust
of His lotus feet and those who are accepting are
feeling joy. They are accepting me with love, thinking
that I can give them life. You will come to know all
this news in the Joint Report.

A crosscheck is being sent. It will not be difficult to
cash it if you have a bank account. Otherwise you can
collect money with the help of Bon Mahārāja or other
friends. Please reply to me as soon as you receive my
letter.



Nivedana (I offer myself to you)

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




P.S. There is no need for any professional mṛdaṅga
player. If there is any good devotee who wants to come,
send me his name and address.



Enclosure–One check #: 0055445 for Rs 1500/- (rupees
fifteen hundred)

ACB report




                           9
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017


October 26th, 1966




26 Second Avenue,

Apartment B1R

New York 10003

USA

26th Oct 1966



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,



Accept my daṇḍavats. I last wrote to you on 28th of
September, and I also sent you a check for Rs 1500/-. I
still haven’t received a letter from you, and I am
worried. Please make me happy by writing me a letter as
soon as you finish reading this one. Please let me know
if all the goods have been purchased. If you don’t think
that the money I sent is enough, don’t buy the taṁburā
for Rs 200/. But the other goods should be packed
properly, and you must send them to Calcutta. Along with
the railway receipts send it by registered post to the
following address:



M/S United Shipping Corporation

14/2 Old China Bazaar St.

Calcutta – 1



Send it to them with the train receipt, and forward it
by registered post with acknowledgement. They will ship
it and deliver it to the USA. Have you received a letter
from the Scindia Steam Navigation Company? I am sure you
will get one from them. I am eager to hear how you have
progressed with this.

(See document A).

The preaching work is going on very well here. Someone
wrote an article in the newspaper saying that, “In
America people had the idea that God had either died or
gotten lost, but Bhaktivedānta Swāmī, within three
months, has explained to the atheist sampradāya that God
is existing within Hari-kīrtana.” This is all a
glorification of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda and is fulfilling his desire with “vijaya
vaijayantī” (victory flag and garland). I am very
insignificant, so whichever way he is guiding me, I am
doing that. Write to me soon and make me happy.

                            10
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017


A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




November 19th, 1966




“Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga Jayatho”




A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī 26 Second Avenue

Apt: B1R

New York, NY 10003

U.S.A. D/Nov. 19, 1966.



Śrī Śrī Vaiṣṇava Carane Daṇḍavat nati Purvikiyam

I am offering my daṇḍavat praṇāmas to the Vaiṣṇavas’
lotus feet and then I am writing.



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,



Upon receiving your letter dated 13.11.66 I came to know
of all the details. I became very sad upon hearing of
Śrīpād Bhikhu Mahārāja’s untimely passing away. How such
an active, steady, strong and young man’s heart could
fail is beyond my dreams. I am extremely sad. Moreover,
he was a great helping hand for you. Everything is the
desire of Kṛṣṇa. I hope your health is better now.

There is no need to bother Śrīpād Tirtha Mahārāja with
the burden of any work. I sent him Rs 150/- eight months
ago but so far it has not been possible for him to send
anything. All are busy with their own work. In your
previous letter I came to know that you are willing to
help me, but from your current letter I see that this is
difficult for you now. At present there is no need to
send anything. Just deposit the Rs 1500/- in the Punjab
National bank. I am sending a letter in the name of the
bank manager. Kindly deposit that money and the letter
in Vṛndāvana. If they tell you to send the pass book and
the checkbook please send by Regd. Airmail. Otherwise
they can send them themselves.

A visit should also be made to the Gosvāmī of Rādhā-
Dāmodara temple. I sent them two or three letters but
have received no reply. The bank was to pay Rs 5/- per

                            11
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

month. I am desirous to know if they are receiving that
money. Kindly write me a letter after inquiring about
this.

If Trivikrama Mahārāja can send a mṛdaṅga and karatālas
from Navadvīpa that is good. Otherwise I do not want to
trouble you only for a mṛdaṅga (khola). I request you to
write a letter to Trivikrama Mahārāja and if he can
accept this trouble and send them, then after receiving
a letter from him I shall send him separate money.

I was very enthusiastic to learn in your previous letter
that your help will always be available, but having come
to learn from your present letter that you are not well,
I am discouraged. Whatever happens according to Kṛṣṇa’s
desire is for the best. Make me happy by replying to my
letter as soon as you receive mine and give me news of
Vṛndāvana.




Yours,

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




December 15th, 1966




“Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga Jaya”



A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī 26 Second Avenue

Apt. B1 Rear

New York, N.Y.

December 15, 1966



Śrī Śrī Vaiṣṇava Carane Daṇḍavat nati Purvikiyam

I am offering my daṇḍavat praṇāmas to the Vaiṣṇavas’
lotus feet and then I am writing.



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja



After receiving your letter of the 13th of November and
hearing of your difficulty, I replied to you on the 19th
of November. In that letter I instructed you to deposit

                           12
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

Rs 1500/- into my account at the Vṛndāvana Punjab
National Bank. If you have not deposited the money yet,
please let me know if you have purchased the goods or
not. I came to know that my disciple Candraśekhara from
Delhi wrote you a letter. Candraśekhara sent me a copy
of your reply to him. In that letter I came to know that
foolish Candraśekhara had blasphemed you. Fools do not
know how to honor Vaiṣṇavas. By your greatness, please
excuse him. I haven’t instructed him to do such a thing.
I only told him to visit you. Anyway, excuse his
aparādha. Candraśekhara is a good man, but out of
foolishness he used bad words to you. You please forgive
him and me by your good qualities.

If you have not deposited the money in the Punjab
National Bank, you can arrange for the purchase of
Deities (Śrī Vigrahas). They asked Rs 700/- for a pair
of Deities. But if they accept Rs 1200/- for two pairs
of Deities, buy them. Pack them properly in the box and
sent it to my supplying agent (Bakeswar) how to write
even I do not know. But write me like this. As–



A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī

New York Port (U.S.A.)

Via Howrah through

United Shipping Corporation

14/2, Old China Bazaar St.

Soon after you receive my letter let me know what
arrangement you have made. I hope you are all well.



Affectionately yours

A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




(See shipping document A & Candraśekhara document E).




December 30th, 1966




“Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga Jayatho”



A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī 26 Second Avenue


                              13
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

Apt. # B1R

New York, N.Y. 10003

U.S.A. D/Dec. 30, 1966



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja



Accept my daṇḍavats in this letter. I received your
letter dated December 21st and I came to know all the
news. I received the passbook and checkbook from the
Vṛndāvana bank. I received the receipts of the deposits.
Everything is fine. But the particular work for which I
sent the money has not been done. For that you are
“lamenting.” I am also “lamenting.” I received an
enthusiastic letter from Trivikrama Mahārāja and
immediately I sent him Rs 200/- so he could send me one
mṛdaṅga. I do not know what is Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
desire. I have sent advanced money to everybody, but I
have to lament that the work remains undone. I sent Rs
150/- to Śrī Tirtha Mahārāja five months ago, but still
today I am sitting here and lamenting that I don’t have
any mṛdaṅgas and karatālas. Kindly you write to Śrīpād
Trivikrama Mahārāja that he should not give me a reason
to lament. He should arrange to send the mṛdaṅga and
karatālas as soon as he receives my letter. My
lamentation is that if Śrīla Prabhupāda were alive, he
would not have given me a chance to lament. When there
is a war, the government stops all other work and makes
a special arrangement to send weapons. There even may be
some waste of necessary supplies in the war field, but
still there is not a lack of supplies. The government
pays special attention to that. When Bon Mahārāja went
to London, Śrīla Prabhupāda sent Rs 700/- by telegrams
every month for three years. This was thirty years ago.
For my house rent alone, I pay two hundred dollars
monthly, which is Rs 1500/-. Besides this, the electric
bill, the gas bill, the telephone bill, and feeding
fifteen people costs Rs 6000/- per month. In addition,
Back to Godhead is being published. I have sent Back to
Godhead to you in the first mailing. I did not expect
any help in regard to this from my godbrothers. I only
begged a little co-operation from them. Even in that I
am unsuccessful. Certainly Śrīla Prabhupāda is helping
me. Otherwise, how could an insignificant person like me
have given two or four people a chance to become
Vaiṣṇavas?

The general people are all intoxicated and loafers. It
is very popular here to impregnate women, and then take
them to the doctor and give them an abortion. This is
common. They have no lamentation for this. You cannot
imagine from there, how difficult it is to make them
accept good sadācāra (behavior according to scriptural
injunctions). It is so much mercy from Śrīla Prabhupāda
that these kind of “kirāta-hūṇānandhra-pulinda-pulkaśā”
(lowborn) national people are taking up sadācāra. They
are giving up illicit relationships with women,
intoxication, marijuana, tea, coffee, everything. Having
given up meat, they are eating dahl, capati and rice and

                           14
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

are very happy. They do kīrtana and harinama every
morning and evening, and do sandhyā before Śrīla
Mahāprabhu’s picture. To honor the guru-varga, as soon
as they see me, they pay obeisances. I never expected so
much. They are not foolish or inactive. Some are MA and
BA, and are earning three or four thousand rupees per
month. Most of them, at least two of them, give me all
their money. That is why it is possible to spend so
much. It is not possible to beg here. It is not possible
to run a matha or temple if money does not come from
earning. Here it is not possible to go from door to door
to beg flour and rice. Without notice it is not possible
to meet with any gentlemen. It is necessary to make an
engagement beforehand. Along with all this
inconvenience, in this faraway foreign country, I am
working alone, helplessly. My only hope is Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. I have no one else.
In my house, my wife and son did not help me, so I left
my home. I thought that godbrothers would help me, but
even that I did not get. That is why, when you wrote in
your letter, dated 20.9.66, “I will always be ready to
serve you from India in any way I can,” and hearing this
I was very hopeful. But in your letter 13.11.66, two
months later, you wrote that Tirtha Mahārāja was coming
to Vṛndāvana so “if you let me know by letter, he will
arrange to send everything to me. Then I will give all
of the money into his hand.” Thus I was forced to write
you to deposit all the money in the bank. Otherwise
there was no other reason. Anyway, forgetting all this,
if you can help me from India, you will certainly attain
the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda. In my old age I have to
take so much risk, but not to fulfill any of my own
desires. Śrīla Prabhupāda had desired this work, and I
am trying to fulfill that desire according to my
ability. Personally I have no ability. My only hope is
Śrīla Prabhupāda. So if you help me in any way, know
that it will certainly be all auspicious for you.




Yours,

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




April 14th, 1967




“Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga Jayatho”



By Air Mail Registered Post



International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness Inc.

                              15
Letters_from_America.txt                         5/5/2017


TWENTY-SIX SECOND AVENUE, NEW YORK, N.Y. 10003

TELEPHONE: 674-7428



ACARYA: Swāmī A.C. Bhaktivedānta April 14, 1967.



TRUSTEES:

Larry Bogart

James S. Greene

Carl Yeargans

Raphael Balsam

Robert Leftkowitz

Raymond Marais

Stanley Moskowitz

Michael Grant

Harvey Cohen



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,



Accept my daṇḍavats. I received your and Vinoda Kumāra’s
letters together on 6.4.67 on time. I read the letters
the day before yesterday, and on 12.4.67 I have sent you
three hundred dollars in rupees. Let me know as soon as
you receive the money. I am sending you my Delhi and
Vṛndāvana room keys, and some other keys along with my
letter. I still did not receive any letter from
Trivikrama Mahārāja. You had deposited Rs 1500 in my
Vṛndāvana account. I sent a check of Rs 200 to the
Vṛndāvana bank. If Trivikrama Mahārāja finds it
difficult to cash the check, tell him to write on the
back of the check, “pay to B.V. Nārāyaṇa,” and you can
cash it. If he had returned the check to me, I would
have cashed it and sent it back to him. Anyway, if he
has not cashed the check, you take it and cash it. I
have some money in Vṛndāvana, which I have not spent.
Therefore the total is Rs 2250/- and there is Rs 200 to
be deposited. Spend the money as follows:

1 harmonium (A) according to description Rs 350/-

1 harmonium (C) “ “ “ Rs 500/-

1 sitar (A) “ “ “ Rs 250/-

1 sitar (B) “ “ “ Rs 250/-


                             16
Letters_from_America.txt                        5/5/2017

Rs 1375



1 tanpura (A) “ “ “ Rs 200/-

1 tanpura (B) “ “ “ Rs 250/-

2 mṛdaṅgas (the body should be made of tin Rs 150

according to Trivikrama Mahārāja’s description) Rs 1975

10 pairs of good Navadvīpa karatālas Rs 100/-

Rs 2075



Total Rs 2450/-

Rs 2075

Balance Rs 375/-



(See document A)



There is no need to purchase any warm clothes for Vinoda
Kumāra. Here I have about four or five overcoats and
warm chadars etc. There is no need to bring any bedding
while traveling by ship. First of all, it is summer.
Secondly, they will provide blankets, bedding and
everything on the ship.

The brahmacārīs and I use very simple clothes here. I am
sending you a photograph to show how I live here. I am
making the Americans wear brahmacārī robes, and shave
up. If a brahmacārī from India dresses as an American he
will not be appreciated. So tell Vinoda Kumāra to come
as a brahmacārī . There are enough overcoats and warm
clothes here. If it is necessary, buy him one good
blanket and one pair of shoes (not made of leather).
That means do not spend more that Rs 100/- on him,
including the journey to Calcutta. So out of Rs 375/-,
if Rs 100/- is spent for Vinoda Kumāra, Rs 275/-
remains.

Pack everything in Delhi and send it by goods train to
Howrah station to my United Shipping Corporation agent
(freight paid R/R). Register in the address of
registered letter M/S United Shipping Corporation 14/2,
Old China Bazaar St, Room No. 18, Calcutta.

Spend as you need for your transport to Delhi and for
your two to four day stay there. Pack all books after
making a list, and get 11 steel trunks packed. It means
closing the box, locking it, stitching sacks around it
and locking it with iron straps. On the top of each
package write A. C. Bhaktivedānta, New York (via
Howrah). Send a copy of all goods to the shipping agent
R/R. Send one copy to me along with R/R. If Rs 275 is

                           17
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

not enough to send these goods then do not buy the
karatālas. Then Rs 100/- more remains. In this way if
everything is done under your supervision I shall be
very glad. I hope you will ever oblige me by helping in
this way. Kindly send me my mṛdaṅga and karatālas that
are in Vṛndāvana.

The key that is left in Vṛndāvana is the key to the
kitchen. After you open the door of the room you will
find a big key on the right side of the wall shelf. Open
the door of my sitting room with that key. My mṛdaṅga
and karatālas are in that room. There are karatālas in
the kitchen also. Please get the room cleaned by
Sorojini and give her one rupee. The bank is supposed to
pay Rs 5/- to the Gosvāmī per month, but the Gosvāmī
never wrote me a letter. Try to find out if he receives
the money and make me happy by writing me as soon as you
receive this letter.




Krpā parthi (I want your mercy)

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




PS. If it is possible send me tilaka and agarbathi.




May 17th, 1967




26 Second Avenue # B1

New York, NY 10003 USA

May 17, 1967



Śrī Śrī Vaiṣṇava Carane Daṇḍavat nati Purvikeyam

I am offering my daṇḍavat praṇāmas to the Vaiṣṇavas’
lotus feet and then I am writing.



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,



I received your letter dated 11 May, 1967, and have
become so much upset. In your letter you say, “You have
given me some advice about good behavior for living in

                            18
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

the Maṭha.” Also in this letter you write, “There is no
need for you to give me this advice.” I could not
remember where I have written this thing. So you must
tell me in which letter I have written this and send me
a quotation of what I said. Otherwise I am feeling very
upset. Because in all the Gauḍīya Maṭhas, I think that
you are the real guru-sevaka, so I always correspond
with you and I always give my full love and affection to
you.

If I was not thinking like this and putting so much
trust in you, I would never have sent you my key and my
money. I have so much faith and love for you. Why do you
think that I am criticizing you? If you think this, it
is like a thunderbolt striking my head. Please, I am
requesting you to send a copy or quotation of that
letter. Otherwise the pain in my mind will not go away.
I never wrote to criticize you. This is contrary to the
result I wanted.

I am making an inquiry at the bank. When you get the
money, you must send me news of it immediately. If you
send me your bank account number, I can send money to
that account number in the future. Then there will be no
difficulty.

Regarding Vinoda Kumāra. I sent you a copy of his first
letter. Perhaps in the first letter Vinoda Kumāra didn’t
say anything about his clothes or maintenance, or that
he wanted Rs 800/- or 1000/-. But now that he is asking,
I and my trustees have become upset. You know that it is
very expensive here. If anyone wants to stay here
independently, it is impossible. To take a visitor’s
visa and then earn money by working is illegal. So as I
informed you before, it must be handled carefully. If he
comes on a visitor’s visa, by Appointment on Probation,
then perhaps in the future we can help him. If this is
clear, then on this condition only he can come on the
visitor’s visa. Otherwise he can come on an Alien Expert
application, as a music master. He can apply at the
Embassy for this. He can say, I want to earn money as a
music teacher. If the American Embassy gives permission,
then as an alien music master I have no objection. But
not if he comes here with a visitor’s visa and tries to
earn money to send to his country. I have written about
this matter before, and now I am writing again. So you
must take care of this. There is such a difference
between our country and America in regards to the rules
and regulations of maṭhas and mandiras. Without
permission, collecting one farthing here is not
possible.

If, as a music master, he wants to stay here
independently, his room rent, food and lodging will cost
two hundred dollars per month. This is Rs 1500/-. Who
will supply this money? That is my worry. Again I write
that with a visitor’s visa it is not possible to earn
money in this country. If he gets the alien expert visa
he can come and I have no objection. He can stay in our
matha and earn money and have employment. He can do
this. Write me whatever you decide. I hope all is well
with you.



                           19
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017


Yours,

A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




May 24th, 1967




“Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga Jayatho”



A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī 26 Second Avenue

Apt. # B1R

New York, NY 10003 USA

D/ May 24, 1967

Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,



Accept my daṇḍavats. I received your letter dated
19.5.67 and became very happy to read it. I always
consider you as my son! But I had been very hurt to read
a part of that last letter which had in it some harsh
words. But now I have forgiven you just as a father
forgives his son. I always have a very high opinion of
you. If I ever chastise you with hard words, you
tolerate it thinking that I am your old father. If I
ever advise you, you shouldn’t think it to be unwanted.
Rather, it will be auspicious for you. In the house, if
the father and son quarrel, it doesn’t break the
relationship between them.

After receiving my letter, I request that you first go
to Delhi and get all the books packed. If you are late
going to Delhi, then you should write to the manager of
the temple, Śrīman Śrī Kṛṣṇa Pandit, 4092 Kuncha Dilwali
Singh Ajmer Gate, Delhi 6, and let him know you are
coming. Mention in the letter the date on which you will
arrive there.

In the context of your receiving money late, I have
written to Śrīman Vṛndāvana in Calcutta to come to you
with money. If he comes then there is not need to spend
his money but out of the Rs 2250 I sent to you, the
expenses of coming to Delhi, staying there and packing
the books in a box, can be met. That means that up to
the maximum of Rs 300 only can be spent in Delhi. After
getting the books packed, please send these goods to
Howrah Station by freight train – marking them FREIGHT
PAID. Send the railway receipt by registered post to:




                            20
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

M/S United Shipping Corp.

14/2 Old China Bazaar St.

No. 18. Calcutta 1



They are our shipping agents. I have received their
letter dated March 27, 1967 asking us to send the books
to Howrah and to send the railway receipt to them along
with a list of the books. (When writing to them please
mention about their letter).

Whatever instructions I have given to you in my precious
letters about work to do in Delhi, please take care of
it. There is no need to buy the musical instruments.
There is a very good musical instrument company in
Calcutta, M/S. Dwarkin and Son. The money has to be sent
to him. Keep only Rs 800/- with you for spending and the
rest of the Rs 1850/- deposit in my account either in
Vṛndāvana or Delhi.



Vṛndāvana Punjab – Punjab National Bank A/C no. Savings
Fund 2913 or Delhi – The Bank of Baroda Limited, Chandni
Chowk S-A A/C no. 1452



After finishing the work in Delhi and depositing the
money, kindly write me a letter. I will then make a
separate check to Dwarkin and Son, they will arrange to
send the musical instruments.

Six months ago I sent Trivikama Mahārāja Rs 200/- to buy
a mṛdaṅga and karatālas, but I don’t know why he still
has not sent them. I will be very grateful if you can
send him a reminder letter.

About Vinoda Kumāra, this is the situation. In his first
letter he didn’t reveal his mind clearly. Then later he
asked for Rs 800/- for clothes for himself, and said he
wanted to stay as a music master. He refused to wear
kunti-mālā and tilaka. If he speaks like this before he
comes here – who knows what he will ask for afterwards,
that will not be within our capacity to supply him.

I am trying to build the characters of these American
boys, who are lakhs more times more tarpan (servants of
their own senses) than Indian boys. Then if an Indian
boy enters this situation and also serves his own senses
it will not make the atmosphere very peaceful. I had to
leave my own family and children because I was unable to
tolerate seeing them remain servants of their senses.
All the American children who are staying with me have
shaved their heads, have mālā and tilaka and always
follow my orders. As soon as they see me they do
daṇḍavat praṇāmas (obeisance). All the work is done very
peacefully. In this situation, if an Indian boy,
especially a disciple from our sampradaya, doesn’t wear
mālā and tilaka and doesn’t agree to wear the robes of a
brahmacārī – it will not make a peaceful atmosphere. I

                            21
Letters_from_America.txt                         5/5/2017

don’t want such a thing.

If Vinoda Kumāra is ready to come here and live in my
style, and follow my orders for six months, and if I
then understand he is capable of running a musical
school, I may open a musical class for him. The society
will spend everything for him. That’s enough of this
talk for now. Especially if one comes with a visitor’s
visa, he is not allowed to earn money as I have told you
before. To make a visa for a musical teacher is not very
difficult. With the help of the society, it can be made
even after coming here. He must discuss and consider all
of these points and then he can come. Otherwise the
society is unable to welcome him. The society wants to
say that he should have written all of these details
before. Now do whatever you think is correct. Whatever
we want to say from our side is written in the
Appointment Letter. If you have not seen that, please
see one. I hope everything is well. I am waiting for
your reply.



Śrī Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




[After writing this letter Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja sent another letter June 1st, 1967, informing
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja of his serious illness. See
document C].




June 14th, 1967




International Society for Krsna Consciousness, Inc.

Twenty-Six Second Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10003

Telephone: 674-7428

Acarya: Swami A.C. Bhaktivedanta

Trustees:

Larry Bogart

James S. Greene

Carl Yeargans

Raphael Balsam

Robert lefkowitz

Raymond Marais

                           22
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017


Stanley Moskowitz

Michael Grant

Harvey Cohen



My Dear Narayan Maharaj,

I thank you very much for your letter dated June 7 1967
along with the letter of Sriman Rayrama (Raymond
Marais). While replying you this letter I am feeling
well. From the hospital I have been transferred to the
New Jersey seashore and I am glad to inform you that I
am improving daily, a little bit. The weakness is still
continuing and sometimes I feel diziness but the
seashore breeze gives me much relief. My disciples here
are Godsend, they are all more than my father and
mother, and they are taking so much care for me that I
shall never be able to repay the debts. I hope to
survive by the prayers of the boys otherwise I would
have died on the day when the stroke was so severe. All
the boys in 3 branches in New York, San Fransisco and
Montreal, prayed for me to Sri Krishna and chanted the
whole night and with vow they fasted and I am sure only
for their prayer I am on the path of recovery. I cannot
express my gratitude for their sincere love for me and I
can only pray that Sri Krishna may bless them with
advanced Krishna Consciousness. In the hospital they
spent money like anything up to the extent of 600-700
rupees daily, so there is no dearth of care and
treatment, but still I think Ayurvedic treatment is
better for this kind of disease. After all only Krishna
can help me; medicine is not sufficient. I thank you for
your letter and consulting Giri Maharaj and other
Vaishnavas. Your good wishes and all the Vaishnavas good
wishes can only save me. Your letter also has given me
sufficient strength. I am thinking of returning to India
as soon as I get a little strength because by plane it
will take at least 24 hours by the fast air line so I
must have sufficient strength to fly that long a period
and as advised by you I shall go directly to Calcutta
and after consulting some good physician there I may
come back to Mathura-Vrindaban. But I am sure if I go
back to Vrindaban the atmosphere will cure me. The
danger period is over: by the grace of Lord Krishna.

So far as the Delhi books are concerned, you can arrange
immediately for their dispatch to Howrah station by
goods train which runs every week and goes very fast.
All the books should be listed in duplicate and one of
them should be sent with the railway receipt to Mesrs.
United Shipping Corp. 14/2 Old China Bazaar, Room no. 18
Calcutta, 1, By registered Post with Acknowledgement
due. The other copy of the list of books may be sent to
me. The packing may be done very nicely and the steel
trunks may be used for packing. If they are not
sufficient to cover all the books, then wooden boxes
should be purchased and packed nicely bound with iron
straps. The steel trunks also should be strapped with
iron straps.


                           23
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

In each and every packing box the following marks should
be given:

A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

New York (Via Howrah Station)

For the time being you can purchase some bottles
Chavanaprasa and Makradhvaja-purchased from Sadhana
Ousadhalaya who has got branches in Chaandni Chowk,
Delhi.

In Fathe-Puri, Masjid No. 32 there is a firm SS,
Brijbasi and Sons, please see them and enquire what they
have done in respect of our orders for pictures for
which we have sent 100 dollars--and let me know the fate
of our order. From the amount Rs 2 235/-you will spend
all that is required for performing Delhi affairs and
the balance may be deposited in my SB account # 1452
with the Bank of Baroda Ltd. Chandni Chowk, Delhi. If I
return to India money will be required or if I do not
return the same will be paid by check to Dwarkin and
sons who have already submitted their invoice for
musical instruments.

I hope you will kindly do the needful as per my
instructions and let me know by return mail. All the
expenditure including your going to Delhi and coming
back, postal conveyance, everything, should be done out
of my money.

Vinod Kumar may come here after he has duly received the
passport and visa. I am replying his letter separately.

Hope this will find you in good health. Am awaiting your
kind reply.

Your ever well-wisher,

A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami

N.B. Sri Krishna Pandit and Chandra Sekhar & Vinoda
Kumara will help you in doing things nicely. Please make
the R/R Freight Paid and send me the no. of the R/R
along with the duplicate list of books.




July 1st, 1967




26 Second Avenue

Apartment B1R

New York 10003 USA

July 1st 1967



                           24
Letters_from_America.txt                        5/5/2017


Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja



Gradually I am becoming well. Today is my best day,
which is why I am writing you a letter in my own hand. I
still have not received a reply to the letter I sent you
on June 14th. I am very eagerly waiting to know if you
have been to Delhi and if the books were sent or not.
(See document B & D). In the meantime I have written a
letter to Vinoda Kumāra. I haven’t received any reply
from him. I am worried about that also. As soon as you
receive my letter, please kindly reply to me.

It is decided that I am going to San Francisco on
Wednesday 5th July, and on July 9th there will be Śrī
Śrī Jagannatha Deva Rathayatra maha festival. I don’t
know how successful it will be, but the program is
settled. There were some plans for my return to India,
but at present it is not possible for me to travel
twenty-four hours by airplane. I am therefore going to
San Francisco, which takes only six hours. It has been
decided that I will stay on the beach by the sea. As
soon as you receive my letter, please reply to the
following address:



International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness

518 Frederick Street,

California 94117



What happened to Vinoda Kumāra’s passport? I have
written him a separate letter, but there has been no
reply so far. In this far away foreign country, with a
very weak body, I feel some difficulty if I don’t
receive letters on time. I still don’t feel fully
strong, but I am writing to you in my own hand. I hope
you will make me happy by responding as soon as you
receive my letter. The work I have at hand will take two
to three months to finish. I hope that by next September
I may be able to return to India. If I obtain all of
your blessings, I hope I will quickly finish my work and
be able to return to Śrī Śrī Vṛndāvana dhama. I pray you
all are well.



Vasaṁvad (Gratefully)

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




July 12th, 1967



                           25
Letters_from_America.txt                         5/5/2017



International Society for Krsna Consciousness, Inc.

Twenty-Six Second Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10003

Telephone: 674-7428

Acarya: Swami A.C. Bhaktivedanta

Trustees:

Larry Bogart

James S. Greene

Carl Yeargans

Raphael Balsam

Robert lefkowitz

Raymond Marais

Stanley Moskowitz

Michael Grant

Harvey Cohen



My Dear Narayana Maharaj,

Please accept my dandabats. I thank you very much for
your letter dated July 3, 1967. I am very pleased that
you have so kindly dispatched the books from Delhi. I am
now staying at the following address:

C/o Budes Paradisio

Alamed Patio

Stinson Beach, California

I have come here for recuperating my health. It is a
very nice place. The building is most aristocratic, and
just situated on the sea beach, Pacific Ocean. I hope I
shall be able to get sufficient strength here and I
expect to return to India by the next month of
September. I understand that you have already spent Rs.
402 out of Rs. 2235, so out of the balance you can spend
as follows: to the Vrindaban Gosain, I wish to pay him
Rs. 100 in kind. That is to say you can purchase some
rice, dahl and wheat worth Rs. 100 and deliver them for
sevapujah of Sri Radhadamodar. But if grains are
controlled and you cannot purchase on open market, then
you can pay him cash Rs. 50, and take a receipt from
him. You can also keep with you Rs. 50 to be paid to him
at the rate of Rs.5 per month until I return. I think
until I return you can go to Vrindaban once in a month,
and get my rooms cleaned by Sarozini and pay him Rs. One
for cleaning and taking care of my outside veranda. So,
you can spend your coming and going charges, pay to

                            26
Letters_from_America.txt                         5/5/2017

Gosain Rs. 5 and to Sarozini Rs. one per month. After
this expenditure the balance remains Rs. 1733. If
Vinodkumara has secured his passport and "p" form, then
let him purchase two best harmoniums. I think he can
purchase from Dwarkin and Sons at the cost of 556 Rs.
each. So, get one bank draft for Rs. 1110 in favor of
Messers Dwarkin and Sons, Esplanad, Calcutta, payable in
Calcutta, and let Vinodkumar take this draft deliver to
Messers Dwarkin and Sons and take delivery of two
harmoniums. Out of the balance money he can take Rs. 75
for his going to Calcutta for some pocket expenses on
the ship. From the balance money he can purchase sitar
and tampoura from Calcutta according to his choice. I
think this arrangement will be approved by us all.

I am very much eager to return to India for a change,
but at the present state of health it is not possible.
Vinodkumar must bring the medicines while he is coming
here. I have sent $ 100, that is Rs. 750, to Trivikram
Maharaj for purchasing khole and kartal. Vinodkumar must
go to Nabadwip while going to Calcutta and take delivery
of the khole and kartal. All these things must be very
nicely packed and brought with him as his personal
luggage. I thank you very much once more for the trouble
you are taking for me. This is all for Srila
Prabhupada's service. Finally do not mind all the
trouble which I give you occasionally. Let us cooperate
for propagating Krishna Consciousness all over the
world. The Delhi room may be kept as it is until my
further advice.

Yours sincerely,

A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami




July 14th, 1967




“Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga Jayatho”



A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī C/O P/M Stinson Beach

California U.S.A.

July 14th, 1967.



Śrī Śrī Vaiṣṇava Carane Daṇḍavat nati Purvikeyam

I am offering my daṇḍavat praṇāmas to the Vaiṣṇavas’
lotus feet and then I am writing.



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,

                            27
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017




I am very happy to receive a letter in your own
handwriting dated the 8th of July. I have received all
of your letters and I have replied to each. I hope you
have received them. I am worried that Vinoda Kumāra
still has not received his passport and “P” form. If he
still hasn’t received the passport, deposit the rest of
the money in the Vṛndāvana Bank. It is very possible
that I will return to Vṛndāvana in the upcoming August.
After, if Kṛṣṇa keeps me alive, I will come back here. I
had planned to preach so much here. But all the work is
postponed due to my health deteriorating. Certainly the
disciples are doing their best but they need to learn a
lot. It is all possible if Kṛṣṇa bestows His mercy.

At present I am anxious to return to Vṛndāvana. Here I
stay in a palatial building. There are always four of
them ready to serve me, and there is no want of prasāda,
lodging or any care. However, I still feel that my
broken kutira without any opulence, bathing in the
Yamuna, darśana of the temples, and the ripped cotton
quilt of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are so very sweet. Being
so far from Vṛndāvana I am realizing its māhātmya
(greatness). Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, “As Kṛṣṇa is
to be worshipped so is Vṛndāvana.” Now I am somewhat
realizing that. As Kṛṣṇa is sweet, Vṛndāvana is
similarly sweet. You bless me so that I can return to
Vṛndāvana. I am old now. I am not afraid to die, but if
my life air passes away in the lotus dust of the
Vaiṣṇavas in Vṛndāvana then that would be very blissful.
As soon as I am well I want to return to Vṛndāvana.
Then, if I feel better I will return here and preach.
The foundation of preaching has become good here. In the
future, even if I do not come, any sincere Vaiṣṇava can
come and do hari-kīrtana here.



Among the three branches I am willing to install Śrī Śrī
Rādhā Kṛṣṇa in Montreal (Canada). The Deities will
arrive there at the end of this month. I shall then go
to Montreal. And if I am alive I shall reach Delhi,
directly via London and Moscow. I shall let you know on
time.

In Delhi there are many books in the almirah. If you
could send those, it would be good. Anyway I shall write
you later about this.

I have replied to the United Shipping Corporation
accordingly – no worry. I hope you are well. Write to me
about Vinoda Kumāra. You wanted to know about my health.
“As in a broken house with only fireflies for light, as
long as it lasts, is good.” I was not supposed to
survive the stroke that attacked me, but Kṛṣṇa somehow
kept me alive. With the mercy of Śrīla Prabhupāda and
his Ṭhākura Kṛṣṇa’s desire, I am still alive. You should
know that this is a wonder. Every moment the signs of my
health change. Only Kṛṣṇa’s mercy is keeping me alive.
Gradually life is coming in my dead body and there are
some improvements. That is why I am writing to you in my
own handwriting. You are a sincere Vaiṣṇava. Kṛṣṇa will

                           28
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

certainly listen to you. You pray to Kṛṣṇa that before
dying I will be able to have darśana once more of
Vṛndāvana.




Vasaṁvad (Gratefully),

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




July 15th, 1967




“Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṅga Jayatho”



A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Bodes Pardisio

July 15, 1967.




Śrī Śrī Vaiṣṇava Carane Daṇḍavat nati Purvikeyam

I am offering my daṇḍavat praṇāmas to the Vaiṣṇavas’
lotus feet and then I am writing.



Śrīpād Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,



If Kṛṣṇa desires I will reach Delhi or Calcutta next
week, so you have no need to spend any money. If Vinoda
Kumāra gets his passport, he must wait for my letter.
Only one disciple will come with me. The cost for one
ticket is Rs 50000/- (fifty thousand rupees), so I am
now a little bit worried. For now don’t spend whatever
rupees you have left. Wait for my letter.




Vasaṁvad (Gratefully)

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




                            29
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

October 22nd, 1968




This letter was originally written in Bengali by Śrīla
BhaktivedāntaSwāmī Mahārāja on the occasion of the
disappearance of Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Goswāmī
Mahārāja. It was addressed to Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Trivikrama Goswāmī Mahārāja, one of the prominent
disciples of Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Kesvava Mahārāja. It
was then translated into Hindi by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and printed in the Śrī Bhāgavata
Patrika magazine in December 1968. The following is the
English translation of that letter.




All glories to Śrī Guru & Gaurāṅga



Seattle, Washington

October 22, 1968




I offer my humble prostrated obeisance at the lotus feet
of all the Vaiṣṇavas.



Śrīpād Trivikrama Mahārāja,



Yesterday I received your letter dated October 12, and
its contents were heart-breaking. Kindly inform me of
the details of the sudden disappearance of Pūjyapāda
Mahārāja (Śrīla B.P. Keśava Mahārāja). I had a very
long-standing intimate relationship with Śrīla Mahārāja.
When I used to visit Śrīdama Māyāpura, I was taken care
of by Śrīpād Narahari Dādā and Śrīpād Vinoda Dādā with
great affection. They were my extremely loving friends.
Also in Calcutta, the senior Tīrtha Mahārāja, Professor
Niśikanta Sannyal and Vasudeva Prabhu, were very dear to
me. Afterwards I used to visit and associate freely with
Śrīpād Śrīdhara Mahārāja as if we were the closest of
family members. Except for Śrīpād Śrīdhara Mahārāja, all
of the above-mentioned Vaiṣṇavas have gradually
disappeared. Our time is also approaching, so it will be
best to have the opportunity to serve Śrīla Prabhupāda
as long as possible.

I have a very close connection with the Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti. Yourself, and particularly Śrīpād Vāmana
Mahārāja, are well aware of the fact that I am one of
the three persons who founded Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti. We had conceived the idea of the formation of

                              30
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti at Bosapada Lane, Calcutta,
even before Śrīla (Keśava) Mahārāja accepted sannyāsa.
Within a few days of the formation of the Samiti, Śrī
Narottamānanda Brahmacārī (presently Tridaṇḍi Swāmī Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Kamālā Madhusūdana Mahārāja) separated
himself from the Samiti. At that time Śrīpād Vāmana
Mahārāja, who was then a brahmacārī, visited our home at
Sītākānta Banarji Lane. He made me the chief editor of
the Bengali magazine, Śrī Gauḍīya Patrika.

Respecting the order of Śrīla (Keśava) Mahārāja, I
started writing articles for the Gauḍīya Patrika
regularly. Śrīla Mahārāja greatly appreciated whatever I
wrote. Thereafter, I was also appointed as the president
of the Hindi magazine, Śrī Bhagavata Patrika, and many
of my articles were published in that. Afterwards I
could not submit articles due to lack of time. Now I
have become a resident of foreign lands and I have to
travel twenty thousand miles every year.

The greatest compassion of Śrīla Keśava Mahārāja was to
make me a sannyāsī. I had taken a vow that I would never
accept sannyāsa, but Śrīla Mahārāja forcibly gave it to
me. He would certainly have been most pleased today to
see the success of my preaching. Last year I visited him
in Calcutta along with my disciples, and despite being
bedridden, he was very pleased to receive us. I have
complete confidence that both in his manifest presence
and after his disappearance, he must be very pleased to
see my widespread preaching of the message of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu in Western countries like America, Canada,
England, Germany and Hawaii (Honolulu), situated in the
Pacific Ocean, as well as eastern countries like Japan
(Tokyo) and so on.

I was a staunch gṛhamedī (one whose thoughts are
absorbed in household affairs). Śrīla Prabhupāda used to
come to me in dreams from time to time and call me to
renounce family life and come along with him. The dreams
would frighten me and make me think that I would have to
accept sannyāsa. I didn’t have any desire to take
sannyāsa. But upon the repeated insistence of Śrīpād
Nārayana Mahārāja, Śrīla Keśava Mahārāja bestowed
boundless mercy upon this unwilling and blind person, by
forcibly giving me sannyāsa. It seems that this desire
of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s was transmitted into his heart,
and it was thus that my sannyāsa was accomplished.

So I am eternally indebted to Śrīla (Keśava) Mahārāja.
Therefore, immediately after receiving your letter, I
organized a viraha-sabhā, an assembly at the Seattle
temple to honor his disappearance. I am sending the
condolence resolution of the meeting along with this
letter. Kindly accept it as our śraddhāñjali, or humble
homage. In my other centers (the list is enclosed),
particularly London, Hamburg and Honolulu I have given
instruction to arrange a viraha sabhā and offer
śraddhāñjali homage likewise.

You will be glad to know that under my guidance I have
formed three sankīrtana parties comprising American
youths and couples. One such party is currently
traveling to all cities in America and I am also with
this party. The second party of six devotees is

                           31
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

performing kīrtana at different places in London. The
Indians living there are amazed to see them. They have
given up their homeland and come all the way to the
Western world to attain wealth and reputation, but the
Americans are performing harinama-sankīrtana. Somehow
the preaching activities are going on very nicely. I am
interested to know what kind of constitution you are
forming. In this matter you will receive my complete
cooperation, because I am a man of constructive ideas. I
do not like destructive policies.

It was the desire of Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura that Americans perform kīrtana in
Śrīdhama Māyāpura, and that opportunity has now come.
Unfortunately, those who have intruded in Māyāpura
consider it to be their personal property.

These days others are restricted from visiting that
place. Śrīla Keśava Mahārāja used to deal with these
guru-tyāgīs (those who renounce their guru) and guru-
bhogīs (those who enjoy the property of their guru) with
sword in hand. Anyway, last year he mentioned that he
would arrange five acres of land for me in Śrīdhama
Māyāpura. You were present at that time. If you help me
in this matter, I intend to make an asrāma in Māyāpura.
American boys and girls can visit and stay there and
receive proper training. By our cooperation, preaching
activities can be done very nicely. Therefore, I am
eager to know the details of your constitution.

I am going to Montreal tomorrow. From there I will go to
Sante Fe (New Mexico) and then to Los Angeles. I am
sending the addresses of our various centers along with
this letter. We are executing a plan to build New
Vṛndāvana on three hundred acres of land. Kindly reply
to the Los Angeles – Hollywood address as I will be
staying three days in Montreal, seven days in Santa Fe
and almost one month in Los Angeles.



pritivite ache yata nagaradi grāma

sarvatra pracara haibe more nama

Preaching can be spread extensively throughout the world
on the basis of this system. I think that you will make
your constitution directly in accordance with the above
prediction. I hope your bhajana is going on nicely.




Your obedient servant,

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Swāmī




P.S. If you have any nice photograph of Śrīla Mahārāja,
then kindly send it to me. I will get a life size oil

                           32
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

painting made of it and along with a picture of Śrīla
Prabupāda, I will place it in my prominent centers,
particularly New York, Hollywood, London and so forth.




About Srila Bhaktivedanta Swami Maharaja’s Letters




Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja wrote to me every few weeks from
1965 until 1977. I think it is because of the special
nature of our association, going back to 1947, that he
wrote me like this, unique to all others. He established
a deep relationship with me, treating me just like his
own son, more than his own son. He treated me with more
familiarity than he could his dīkṣā disciples. He is my
friend, my very dear friend. He is my śikṣā guru.

I was assisting him in his preaching work. In one letter
he wrote, “In all Gauḍīya Maṭhas, I think that you are
the real guru-sevaka. So I always correspond with you
and I always give my full love and affection to you.” He
regarded me in this way, having faith and love for me.
He was always giving me inspiration, saying, “You are a
very good boy, a good devotee. You are a good guru-
sevaka.” (Letter of 17 May 1967).

Swāmī Mahārāja encouraged me in all ways. Calling me
very near to him, he would share so many things. When he
was first in India, when he was preaching in America and
later when he returned to India, he would tell me all
that happened, how he preached and what his realizations
were. As he explained in his letter, by allowing me to
serve him he helped me. That was my good fortune. He
always told me, “You have helped me and you should
continue to help me. You should come to me more and
more.” Of course, I am not really helping him. Really I
am not, but I have the privilege to serve him. I always
wanted to serve him, then and now. (Letters of 30
December 1966; 24 May 1967)

We would always address him as ‘Swāmījī.’ He had
received the title ‘Bhaktivedānta´ from the assembled
devotees of the Viśva-Vaiṣṇava Rāja-sabhā. Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja then gave him the name ‘Swāmī’
as his sannyāsa name. This is one of the 108 authentic
sannyāsa names. ‘Swāmī’ means one who controls all his
senses. My Gurudeva saw that he was so strong and
qualified in this way. We call him Swāmī with ‘jī’ for
showing special respect. This is not a familiar name. It
is for offering

greater respect. His disciples call him Śrīla
Prabhupāda, but since we are accustomed to calling Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura ‘Śrīla Prabhupāda’, to
avoid confusion we call him Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja or
Swāmījī. This is a very respectful, affectionate name.

You may notice Swāmī Mahārāja’s signatures at the end of
several of his letters. I wrote in one letter to him,

                           33
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

“Why are you not accepting the name you were given at
sannyāsa? Why do you include ‘A.C.’, which represents
your grhastha name?” I was speaking out to him, thinking
that perhaps this is not right. He told me that in
America, in India, and everywhere, he is already known
by the name A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī. I still did not
agree. “Madhvācārya, Rāmanuja, and Viṣṇusvāmī left their
family names, accepting only those names their sannyāsa
gurudevas had given them.” Swāmījī tried to satisfy me,
but I was not satisfied. Then he began to write to me
signing some of his letters only ‘Bhaktivedānta Swāmī.’
Please know that he had affection and care for me. When
anything would happen which I could not understand,
whether I was right or wrong, I would give a strong
position to him in my letters. I think he was
remembering this when he signed some of his letters to
me.

Most people do not know that he had written so many
letters to me. In those early years we did not worry so
much about the letters from Swāmījī. Śubhānanda
Brahmacārī, Premānanda Brahmacārī, and other devotees
read his Bengali aerograms. There were a few in English
also. Most of the later letters from the 1970s were sent
from America – New York, California, and later from all
over the world. He was writing about how the new centers
were going on, how the preaching was, and all these
subjects. He wrote explaining so many details. Most of
them were written in Bengali by his own hand and a few
he personally typed and signed. They were private
letters, not typewritten by any secretary. If anyone
says he did not write these letters, they are saying a
false thing.

Our Premānanda Brahmacārī sent ten or twelve original
aerograms to one disciple of Gopāl Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja
(Sandipani Muni dāsa), to be used as evidence for the
court case in Bombay. Soon afterwards Satsvarūpa
Mahārāja asked me to give the whole collection of
letters to him for his research for Swāmī Mahārāja’s
biography. I promised to show them all. Premānanda
prabhu gave them into the hand of one ISKCON brahmacārī
who said he would deliver them to Satsvarūpa Mahārāja.
Later we discovered that the letters had not reached
their destination. We do not know the name of that boy
who took the letters, but we had faith that he would
deliver them. In those days, I had to keep my own files
and we didn’t record the letters or make copies. Now
they appear to be lost, but all are hoping they can be
returned.

Swāmījī wrote to me, “I will never forget you, but I see
that you are forgetting me.” Because I had not written
for some time, in this sweet manner he was joking. When
a Vaiṣṇava meets or talks with another in a loving
affectionate mood, they speak in this way. He says, “You
have forgotten me. I have not forgotten, but you have
forgotten.” He is showing Vaiṣṇava etiquette. It is not
that anything was wrong, but he is showing loving
affection. (Letter of 21 August 1966; 28 September 1966)

Sometimes it seemed in his letters that Swāmījī was
demanding, “You do this. Now you do that.” He considered
me one of his own. I also speak to all my brahmacārīs

                           34
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

like this. “What you want to do tomorrow, you must do
just now, today. And what you want to do today you
should do just this minute. Even yesterday it should
have been done.” He was fully absorbed in serving Kṛṣṇa.
He could not delay a second. That is why he wrote to me
so forcefully. I am a baddha-jīva (conditioned soul) so
I was not able to run along with him at the speed he was
going. I was like śakti-hīna, I was weak. I could not go
as fast as he. Swāmījī was going so quickly. He was
writing his letters and telling me like this. (Letters
of 19 November; 30 December 1966)

Swāmījī requested me in each letter to do so much
service for him. I sent large quantities of his books,
deities for his new temples, mṛdaṅgas, and other
instruments. Also I found specific medicines, tilaka,
and other things he wanted. For some time I sent him ten
kilos of Mathurā perā, his favorite sweet, every month.
We sent many shipments, including large numbers of
crates for him, first by train to Howrah station, then
by cargo ship to America. I shipped from many places,
including Navadvīpa, but mostly from Mathurā and Delhi.
Some of those freight receipts are still here. (See
documents A&B)

Swāmījī wrote some letters concerning Vinoda Kumāra. He
was the son of a Mathurā-vāsī woman who was a disciple
of Śrīla Śrauti Mahārāja and was very near and dear to
us. Vinoda Kumāra was expert in music. He played
mṛdaṅga, harmonium, vīṇā, and so many instruments. His
voice was very nice. Swāmījī explained in one of his
letters that if I could not personally go there, then I
should send a brahmacārī or anyone I could find to help
him with singing and kīrtana. I told Swāmījī I would
send this boy, and he was satisfied with the idea that
Vinoda would go. His mother also requested me to send
her boy to America. Swāmījī wanted him to become like a
brahmacārī with shaven head and dhoti, but
unfortunately, he would not accept this. We tried to
arrange his going in so many ways, but he was not
suitable. We have heard that this Vinoda Kumāra now
lives somewhere in Bombay. (Letters 19 November 1966; 30
December 1966¬ – document F)

In one letter Swāmījī gave me some advice and I wrote
back strongly. This was a small thing, insignificant.
Our relationship was like that, even with love and
affection we would quarrel sometimes. Like quarreling
amongst friends. One friend may say, “Oh, you are
killing me. I am dying.” Joking somewhat in this way.
When there is love, an occurrence may come to separate
them, but it can never separate.

I don’t know whether others will understand this or not.
Some of Swāmījī’s disciples might not reconcile it. They
may argue, and they may not hear the explanation
properly. People might see that you have published a
quarrel, as if someone has done something wrong. Our
relationship is based on affection, as he said in his
letters. Only from the outside there may appear to be a
problem, not from the inside. We never thought further
about that. See how the continuation of the letters is
going on. It may be that our understanding of a few of
each other’s words was not correct, a misunderstanding.

                           35
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

And he has told like this. There was never any problem
between us. (Letters of 17 May 1967; 24 May 1967)

Candraśekhara dasa and his son lived in Delhi. Swāmījī
wrote to me suggesting that I get their assistance in
the work I was doing for him there. I had been
supervising the care of Swāmījī’s rooms, both in
Vṛndāvana at the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple and at the Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa temple in Chippiwada. When Swāmījī was away in
America, Candraśekhara dasa sometimes helped with that
service. He was helping, but only a very little. Because
he was a business-type, he and his son didn’t have much
time to help me manage.There were some difficulties
working with him. I never took any account of this, but
Swāmījī very kindly wrote apologizing to me about that
trouble. (Letters of 28 September 1966; 15 December 1966
– document E).

In many of his letters, Swāmījī expressed concern that
his disciples be properly trained. I remember one
incident in particular when he wrote that he was very
sorry for Kīrtanānanda dāsa, who had gone out of order.
Swāmījī wrote, “I am anxious about what they will do
after I leave, if they are doing this now. So I am very,
very worried. I told Kīrtanānanda that I knew he was
doing some things against my siddhānta. In order to
preach Kṛṣṇa consciousness he wanted to adopt some
things from Christianity. But I said, ‘I don’t want
this. I want my pure guru-paramparā teachings.’ I wanted
him to go to London, not America. But he defied my order
and went to America instead.” Swāmījī was telling me,
“If I am alive and they are not obeying me now, I am so
worried about what they will do after my departure.”

Around 1980 ten or twelve letters were loaned for the
ISKCON court case in Bombay. They were very wonderful,
detailed letters from Swāmījī. The lawyer presented them
as prime evidence to the Bombay court. The ISKCON
devotees requested me to travel from Mathurā to Bombay
eight or so times to testify in Swāmījī’s favor. One of
his sons was trying to sue ISKCON, wanting its material
assets. He claimed that Swāmījī was not a real sannyāsī
because he was a vaiśya and not a brāhmana. He said that
since Swāmījī was a businessman, he was entitled to his
father’s inheritance. I testified that Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja took sannyāsa initiation in our Keśavaji
Gauḍīya Matha and that I had performed the fire yajña
and Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja, my gurudeva,
had given him the daṇda and mantras. It was all bona
fide. I had to testify as their expert witness that
according to the siddhānta of our line, Swāmī Mahārāja
was certainly included in that same line. I gave many
arguments from Sat-Kriyā-Sāra Dīpikā, the Vedas,
Upaniṣads, and Purāṇas. If anyone from any caste does
bhajana, giving up material life and all bogus things to
become a servant of Kṛṣṇa, then he is qualified to take
sannyāsa. Thus the case was won by śāstra and by the
evidence of those letters from Swāmījī.

Swāmī Mahārāja asked me many times to come with him and
his disciples to preach. From very early on, even before
he went to the West, he would ask me. But I could not go
then. My Guru Mahārāja had ordered me to look after the
Mathurā Maṭha and to preach and translate books in

                           36
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017

Hindi. In his letters from America, Swāmījī again
invited me to assist him. He also wanted other
brahmācarīs to be sent, but none were suitable at that
time. In one letter Swāmījī explained how any sincere
Vaiṣṇava could come there and do hari-kīrtana and help
continue his preaching. This is because all bona fide
Vaiṣṇavas are serving the same mission of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. (Letters of 4 October 1965, 14 July 1967 and
numerous later ones).

In Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s final days he called for me
and in everyone’s presence requested me to assist his
disciples in all respects after his disappearance. He is
my śikṣā guru. Therefore, I consider it my duty and
religious principle to follow his order by helping all
devotees who come to me. In 1936 Swāmījī got the order
from his gurudeva to preach in English in the West and
it took some years to happen. So also I am fulfilling
Swāmījī’s order to me now, after twenty years.

I regret that we do not have all of the original letters
from Swāmī Mahārāja to share with everyone. But I feel
fortunate to have had that association with him before
he was known to ISKCON and the whole world. We spent
much time together over many years, before most of his
disciples were born. Swāmījī performed miracles in
preaching the message of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura and Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Only an empowered
devotee upon whom Kṛṣṇa bestows His mercy – no common
man – could ever preach like he preached. He established
hundreds of temples and preaching centers everywhere.
Each country, city, mountain retreat or dense forest he
visited became a sacred place. He wrote translations and
commentaries on authentic Vaiṣṇava books, which have
been further translated into practically every language
of the world. He sent those books door-to-door, even to
remote villages, to enlighten all people. We are
overjoyed to bear witness to the glory of Swāmījī. He
was a touchstone and wherever he went, all iron he
touched became gold. Not gold but cintamāṇi itself. I
have many more memories I want to share with you about
his glories, which you may not have heard. I pray that
everyone can know and deeply realize the full glory of
Śrīla Śrī Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja.



Table of Contents

Introduction

October 4th, 1965

August 21st , 1966

September 28th, 1966

October 26th, 1966

November 19th, 1966

December 15th, 1966

December 30th, 1966

                           37
Letters_from_America.txt                       5/5/2017


April 14th, 1967

May 17th, 1967

May 24th, 1967

June 14th, 1967

July 1st, 1967

July 12th, 1967

July 14th, 1967

July 15th, 1967

October 22nd, 1968

About Srila Bhaktivedanta Swami Maharaja’s Letters




                           38
