My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt               5/5/2017

My Śikṣā-Guru and Priya-Bandhu

My Instructing Spiritual Master and Dearmost Friend



Remembrances of

Śrī Śrīmad A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda



Compiled from selected interviews,

lectures and writings of



Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja




INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER ONE : OUR FIRST YEARS TOGETHER

His Association with Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Founding Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti

Our First Meeting

Editorial Sevā

Jhansi

Residing in Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha

Accepting Sannyāsa

At Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira

Preparation and Departure for America

Return to India

Preaching in India

CHAPTER TWO : ŚRĪLA PRABHUPĀDA’S DISAPPEARANCE LĪLĀ

Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Desire to go to Govardhana

Visiting Him in His Last Days

His Divine Departure

In Mādhurya-rasa

CHAPTER THREE : MY MESSAGE IS ONE WITH HIS

ENDNOTES

                           1
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt              5/5/2017




INTRODUCTION




This booklet is a collection of recollections and
reflections about His Divine Grace Śrīla A.C.
Bhāktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda, from one of his earliest
śikṣā followers and friends, Śrīla Bhaktivedanta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. These accounts of his
association with Śrīla Prabhupāda span over thirty
years, since they first met in 1947.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja was happy to share his fond
memories of this long-standing and affectionate
relationship, and excerpts from a variety of his
informal interviews and statements have been used. We
have lightly edited his English, because English is not
his native tongue. Had he presented these memories and
appreciations in Hindi, the details and heartfelt
explanations would have been still more eloquent and
detailed.

Śrīla Prabhupāda is a nitya-siddha devotee. He never had
to advance from a conditioned life to pure Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. Therefore, it may be noted that the
descriptions Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja give of his nara-līlā (human-like pastimes)
have nothing to do with this material environment. They
are only meant to help instruct others how to advance in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Our sincere hope is that in reading this booklet, the
worldwide audience of devotees will receive enlivenment
by hearing inspirational memories about our mahā-
bhāgavata-guru from one of his most intimate admirers.
Where this humble effort is not of the highest quality,
or if it fails in any way to properly represent Śrīla
Prabhupāda or Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, we beg for the
forgiveness of the merciful Vaiṣṇavas. We pray that our
most beloved Śrīla Prabhupāda will be pleased with our
desire to more deeply discover and glorify his
transcendental personality, pastimes and saṅkīrtana
mission.

Aspiring servant of Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas,

Mūla-prakṛti dāsī

Remembrances of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda




CHAPTER ONE : OUR FIRST YEARS TOGETHER




                           2
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017



His Association with Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja




My gurudeva, oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, would often speak to me about his
godbrother, parama-pūjyapāda Śrī Abhaya Caraṇāravinda
Bhaktivedānta Prabhu. At that time, before his sannyāsa,
we affectionately called him Abhaya Caraṇāravinda
Prabhu, or Prabhu. My gurudeva always told me how, from
the very beginning, this godbrother was so dear to their
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He explained to
me that his Śrīla Prabhupāda had always highly and
intimately regarded Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu and had
requested him to write articles for the Harmonist
magazine and other publications. Their Guru Mahārāja had
especially ordered him to preach in the English
language, and to distribute widely this knowledge of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and His teachings in the Western
countries.

According to my gurudeva, Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu
was a very great personality, very yuktivādī (good at
giving logical arguments), and always nirvika (bold). He
was a preacher of satya (truth) who was not afraid of
anyone. I had already heard so many times about him from
my gurudeva and from others. I had heard how he was such
a close friend to Gurudeva, such an excellent writer,
and such a sincere and qualified devotee. At that time I
had not yet seen him, but seeing by ears is even more
powerful than seeing by eyes.

Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu was a bosom friend of my
gurudeva ever since they first met in the association of
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s Gauḍīya
Maṭha in 1922. During those years, he was a gṛhastha and
was said to be very beautiful. In 1940, after the
departure of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda,
there was turmoil in the Gauḍīya Maṭha. One party wanted
to arrest some of the senior Vaiṣṇavas, and cases were
filed in the Calcutta court. At that time, our gurudeva,
then known as Vinoda-bihārī Brahmacārī, was akiñcana
(without material possessions) and he travelled to
Prayāga, Allahabad. There he stayed at the Rūpa Gauḍīya
Maṭha for a few days. Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu, who
had his family residence and business in Allahabad,
invited our gurudeva to come and stay in his home as a
guest, and they lived together there for the next four
or five months. During this extended time, they became
very near and dear to each other. They always discussed
Bhagavad-gītā and many other subjects concerning guru-
sevā for their Śrīla Prabhupāda and his mission. (See
Endnote 1.)

When my gurudeva lived with him for those months in
Allahabad, Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu organized much
preaching for them everywhere in that city. He had
cultivated numerous associates from his pharmaceutical
business, and knew many educated, qualified people. He
also arranged for my gurudeva to give extensive lectures

                           3
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

on Vedānta. Together they defeated the māyāvāda
philosophy, and also several influential Catholics and
other Christians; those persons were favorably impressed
by the bona fide arguments and siddhānta so expertly
presented.

Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu appreciated this preaching
so much. He would often tell me, “Your gurudeva is so
logical, and he is such a great philosopher. That is why
I have selected for myself a very best friend like your
gurudeva.”




Founding Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti




My gurudeva was then called Śrī Vinoda-bihārī Brahmacārī
Kṛti-ratna. The name Kṛti-ratna, which means “one who is
a jewel among managers,” was awarded to him by Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda because he managed
the Gauḍīya Maṭha so expertly. This was before my
gurudeva took sannyāsa. In his heart there was a desire
to show Vedānta-sūtra as bhakti-sūtra, and he quoted
ślokas of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to prove this. He would
always state, “Wherever there is any sign of māyāvāda,
bhakti cannot be preached in full force. So we have to
remove māyāvāda at the root.” Abhaya Caraṇāravinda
Prabhu also liked this idea very much. “We must kick out
māyāvāda,” he would often say. Both of them had this
understanding; they were very united in their preaching.

Gurudeva gave the name “Bhaktivedānta” to those of us
who took sannyāsa from him, and when they formed an
organization they called that Samītī “Gauḍīya Vedānta”,
which denotes that Vedānta is synonymous with bhakti.

After the divine disappearance of their Śrīla
Prabhupāda, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and
after the Gauḍīya Maṭha institution had broken apart, my
gurudeva, together with Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu and
Narottamānanda Brahmacārī (later called Śrīla Bhakti
Kamala Madhusūdana Mahārāja), filed the establishment
papers for the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samītī. This was done on
April 7, 1940, the day of akṣaya trītīyā, in a rented
house at 33/2 Bosapada Lane, Calcutta. (See Endnote 2.)

Although they separated from the political upheaval
taking place within their Guru Mahārāja’s institution,
they did not give up Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda or his mission and siddhānta. They wanted to
re-establish his bona fide ideas and instructions, but
they did not give up his Gauḍīya Maṭha. Therefore, the
names of the Maṭhas established by the Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samītī were Devananda Gauḍīya Maṭha, Uddharana Gauḍīya
Maṭha, Keśavaji Gauḍīya Maṭha, and many others.




                           4
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017


Our First Meeting




In 1947, I was in Calcutta as the personal servant to my
gurudeva, and one day there was an inauguration of a new
branch of the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. It was a large
assembly and many Vaiṣṇavas were present there. During
the lecture given by Gurudeva, a gṛhastha devotee came
in at the back door. Upon seeing him, Gurudeva stopped
speaking and asked me to bring him forward. That devotee
humbly hesitated to come forward, but my gurudeva
ordered that he come all the way to the front. Gurudeva
showed great respect to him and insisted he sit next to
him on the platform. I looked up at Gurudeva, silently
questioning, “Who is this devotee?” It was very rare
that he had done this with others. Afterwards he told
me, “This is Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Bābu, my dear
godbrother. He is a very special disciple of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda. He is very humble
and qualifed. You should take note of him, you should
hear carefully from him, and you should serve him.”

At that time I would cook breakfast, lunch, and any
other meal for Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu and many of
the other senior Vaiṣṇavas. I would also wash their
clothes and clean for them. He would watch me, and
became pleased with me. He was happy to see my service
for my gurudeva and asked me many questions about
myself, like where I was from and where and how I had
joined the maṭha. We spoke together, and he was
satisfied with my replies. I was also very impressed
with him, and attracted to him. This is when I began my
service to him in my heart and in my work.

I am thinking now how very fortunate I was to have met
him long ago, and to have served him. We had so much
affection for each other that I cannot explain my heart
sufficiently. He stated in one of his letters to me that
from the first time he saw me, there was affection
between us and that we shared a transcendental
relationship of spontaneous love. He wrote that, as his
Śrīla Prabhupāda had great faith and love for him from
the beginning, he similarly had love and well-wishing
for me. (See Endnote 3.)

He was a powerful speaker, and his lectures were most
influential. Discussing translations from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam by first giving word-for-word meanings, he
would then present thorough explanations; and what he
spoke was beautiful. In those days there were many
senior disciples of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda, such as Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja, Śrīla
Tīrtha Mahārāja, Śrīla Śrauti Mahārāja, Śrīla Naimi
Mahārāja, Śrīla Yayavar Mahārāja, Śrīla Audalomi
Mahārāja, Śrīla Vaikanas Mahārāja, Śrīla Purī Mahārāja,
Śrīla Giri Mahārāja and Śrīla Mādhava Mahārāja. All
these disciples were like tigers and thunderbolts, being
well-versed in siddhānta. They would often come to visit
my gurudeva, and I was able to serve them. Though Abhaya
Caraṇāravinda Prabhu was then a gṛhastha living outside
any maṭha, he was considered by all to be extremely

                           5
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

qualified. He was very bold and never compromised with
anyone regarding the established siddhānta – never. He
defeated and convinced everyone by his realized
preaching.

In those days I often saw him associating with his
godbrothers, and he had many deep friendships in all the
temples where they assembled – in Calcutta, Navadvīpa,
Chinchura, Allahabad, Bombay and Delhi. He was often
meeting with godbrothers, traveling to different maṭhas
for celebrations and discussions, and he always behaved
towards them with affectionate dealings. When his
godbrothers gathered, he would show respect to them
because he was a gṛhastha at that time. And, even though
he was married then, all the sannyāsīs and senior
brahmacārīs highly regarded him because he was a learned
scholar and a potent, brave preacher. He was known by
all to be abhaya, fearless.




Editorial Sevā




Our magazines, Gauḍīya Patrika and Bhāgavata Patrika,
were started in 1953. At that time, Gurudeva requested
Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu, “I want to establish
publications in Bengali and other languages, and I would
especially like you to write articles for them.” Earlier
he had written articles for the Harmonist, and now he
continued to write many wonderful essays, Gītā purports,
etc. He wrote so marvelously that everyone praised him.
He challenged all who were opposed to pure bhakti at
that time, especially the ‘Mūrgī Mission’. He called the
Rāmakrishna Mission ‘the Mūrgī Mission’, because the
members ate chicken. In fact, they ate flesh, eggs and
many other abominable things.

Vivekananda and his Rāmakrishna Mission were very
prominent in those days. They were renowned by the
public, who thought, “Oh, these are such high-class
devotees. In all of India, only they are following the
Vedas, and all others are not. The Gauḍīya Mission and
others are not Vedantic.” Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu
wrote a two-part article about the Mūrgīs. He began with
the first part; and when the second part was also
printed, all but the Mūrgīs were astonished and
convinced. Many requested him to write more articles
like these, which called for the reform of religious
institutions.

At that time the president of India was Dr.
Radhakrishnan. He was very scholarly and his English was
quite erudite, but he was world-famous as a very bold
māyāvādī. He wrote an article in English saying that the
soul in Kṛṣṇa’s body was God, but Kṛṣṇa’s body was not
God. He said that, as with our body and soul, there was
also a difference between Kṛṣṇa’s body and soul.

Guru Mahārāja was not here then, but Abhaya

                           6
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

Caraṇāravinda Prabhu was and wrote a very powerful
article in response. He quoted many strong examples from
śāstra and declared to the President, “Those who speak
like this are rascals. In Kṛṣṇa there is no difference
between deha and dehī, the body and its possessor. All
His qualities, pastimes and names are transcendental. If
one does not have a very pure and realized guru, he
cannot understand this idea. You have no guru; you are
reading śāstra yourself. Just as Gautama Buddha became
śūnyavādī, so you are just like that. At some time in
South India you met with the very renowned
Śaṅkarācārya’s teachings, but you have not read Śrī
Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhvācārya, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī; and you have never read Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa. You should try to know what is acintya-
bhedābheda. Do not be sectarian. You are an authority in
India, the President, but you are not an authority in
religion. You will have to learn something from us.”

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja appointed Śrīpād
Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu to be the editor-in-chief of
the Bengali Gauḍīya Patrika, and I was also in the
editorial board for the Hindi Bhāgavata Patrika. He
usually submitted his articles in Bengali, and
sometimes, if he wrote an article in Hindi, I would edit
and then submit it. This is because his mother language
was not Hindi. Mostly he wrote his articles for our
Gauḍīya Patrika in Bengali. I then translated these into
Hindi and printed them in the Bhāgavata Patrika.

This was before the time of tape machines, and Prabhu
was expert in the skill of stenography. During lectures
of my gurudeva and other senior Vaiṣṇavas, he took
shorthand perfectly and recorded those talks in his
notebooks. His accurate transcriptions were also used
for articles in the Gauḍīya Patrika magazine. Abhaya
Caraṇāravinda Prabhu continued writing for our magazines
every month for many years, and some of those original
editions are still preserved at our maṭha.




Jhansi




I went twice to visit pūjyapāda Abhaya Caraṇāravinda
Prabhu while he was preaching in Jhansi. The first time
I traveled on the train with some of the brahmacārīs;
the second time I went there to see him with my
gurudeva. We stayed four or five days each time.

He had made some connections earlier, during his
frequent travels there for business. Some persons had a
building which was suitable for a maṭha. Prabhu invited
us to consider it for one of our maṭhas, but our
gurudeva was not prepared to settle there. He did not
have enough brahmacārīs, and he also favored a larger
city like Mathurā.

The gentleman who had originally invited Prabhu, Ācārya

                           7
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

Prabhakara Miśra, had become his initiated disciple. I
don’t know whether Prabhu gave dīkṣā to him or not, but
he said that he had accepted this man. I think he had
given him harināma only. At that time Prabhu was
translating Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta; and this disciple
used to help him to correct his Hindi because it was
mixed with Bengali.

During his stay in Jhansi, Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu
personally brought a large and very beautiful mūrti of
Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu from Bankura (near Mednapore,
West Bengal). This is where many deities are made,
especially for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. He had first
ordered the deity and then brought Him to be established
in that temple. He had been doing some regular pūjā
alone there in Jhansi, but the deity was not yet
installed.

Prabhu invited Gurudeva, and we came to visit there for
the installation. Although we arrived for the program,
the installation did not take place. This was because
Guru Mahārāja discussed with Prabhu about the manner in
which those sponsors were allowing him to use the
mandira. When he told us that they could order him to
leave at anytime, Gurudeva said he thought it might be
better if a document was received. There was a
discussion between Gurudeva and the sponsors, and he
made a condition before all present: “If you give the
mandira to pūjyapāda Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Bhaktivedānta
Prabhu, he will be the master of all properties and
activites therein. He will do everything according to
our sampradāya.” The sponsors, on the other hand, were
in the mood that the temple should be in their charge,
and he would be like a priest. Both Prabhu and Guru
Mahārāja rejected their conditions.

My gurudeva and I returned from Jhansi to Mathurā on the
train. Prabhu didn’t come with us then, but after some
days he arrived with the Caitanya Mahāprabhu vigraha and
put Him in the care of my gurudeva. Gurudeva then
installed that very beautiful Caitanya Mahāprabhu here
on the altar in our Keśavaji Gauḍīya Maṭha, where He is
still being served to this day.




Residing in Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha




My gurudeva and I were present on the day Abhaya
Caraṇāravinda Prabhu came again to the Keśavaji Gauḍīya
Maṭha in 1955. We embraced him and he embraced us.
Before coming, he had been successful with his
pharmaceutical business in Allahabad, called Prayaga
Pharmacy, and it was very famous. Many important
personalities of India, including the Prime Minister,
were customers in his shop. Later on, however, he had to
sell it. Then he traveled to all the important cities of
North India, such as Delhi, Kanpur, Lucknow, Agra,
Jhansi, Mathurā, and other towns to sell the medicines

                           8
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

he had made from his own formulas. Kuñja-bihārī Prabhu,
a senior disciple in the maṭha, was especially devoted
to him during this time. He helped to carry his bags and
also to bring him prasādam while he worked.

After a while this business also came to an end, and
Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu gave up his household life
and all its possessions in Calcutta. He again came to
Mathurā, this time without belongings. He brought a
medical formula for treating ringworm, which he
distributed to the shopkeepers, store-to-store, but
sales were not good. He was living in a room he had
rented by the Yamunā, in Hooli Wali Gully near Bengali-
ghāta. He had been there three or four days when I went
to see him. I told him, “Prabhu, why are you staying
here?” He was very humble and didn’t want to impose
himself upon us, so I forcibly took his luggage and told
him, “I will not let you go anywhere else. We are here.
We are your sons. You are our gurudeva’s godbrother and
are very dear to us. We want to care for you. I will not
allow you to stay here, separate from us.” I brought the
brahmacārīs, Kuñja-bihārī Prabhu, Śeṣaśāyī Prabhu and
some others, and we took what few utensils he had and
brought him to live in our maṭha.

I requested him, “Please stay here with us, preaching
Bhagavad-gītā, writing and so on. I know that no one is
assisting you now. I want to personally serve you.
Please live here forever; we never want you to leave.”
He became so glad.

I gave him a room adjacent to mine. His room was there
(pointing to the room one door from the kitchen), and my
room was here. There were only two rooms then, his and
mine. At that time there was no mandira in our Keśavajī
Gauḍīya Maṭha.

We had very little facility to offer him, because
nothing was there in our maṭha. There was just one
bathroom, but still we were very easily able to live
peacefully and accomplish everything we had to
accomplish. At that time he also had nothing to show to
others: “This is mine.” He had only his body and ātmā –
no paisa at all. He only had some copies of his Back to
Godhead magazine, his Gītā, and three or four volumes of
a Bengali Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which are now preserved in
our library. He had no bedding, and no extra boxes or
personal belongings.

We gave him one small room and many large books. Śrīpāda
Nṛsiṁha Mahārāja (one of his godbrothers) and I donated
some Sanskrit and Bengali books to him. There he began
to write many English translations and articles. Day and
night he would stay in his room and do this, and he also
chanted a great deal of harināma and very beautifully
sang bhajanas. We did not know when he ever took rest.
He slept only a short time in the morning, because all
during the night he was awake, and throughout the day
also. He became so pleased with this arrangement of
staying with us, and our Guru Mahārāja also became
pleased when he was informed of this.

We continually requested Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu to
give Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam classes. Usually there not many

                           9
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

devotees attending, because only a few of us lived in
the maṭha then. We were just beginning the Keśavajī
Gauḍīya Maṭha temple, so we had just five or ten
persons. But very high-class, learned gentlemen from
Mathurā would often come to hear him speak. I was known
then as a good kīrtaniyā in the Gauḍīya Maṭhas in Bengal
and Uttar Pradesh, so I would perform kīrtana. Prabhu
would lecture, explaining in his discourses the word-by-
word meaning of each verse under discussion, and very
erudite scholars were attracted by his classes. During
this time he would also give Caitanya-caritāmṛta classes
in the evenings, to those of us who lived at the maṭha.
His devotion for Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His
pastimes was very deep. Later on, after he took
sannyāsa, he often gave these classes in English, even
though almost no one in the maṭha could understand
English. He would say that he was “practicing”.

I would sometimes joke with him, saying, “ Oh, you may
try to be responsible for your children and your wife,
but they are rejecting you.” One of his sons was not
very favorable, and another was somewhat favorable but
not wanting to serve him. So I would say, “Prabhu, why
not take more service from all of us? You should not go
back there. I will beg from door to door and arrange to
get you rice and any other items.”

When Prabhu first came to Mathurā to stay with us, he
had an ailment which he humbly and silently tolerated.
Because he was expert in medicines, he always used
Ayurvedic or homeopathic remedies when necessary and
avoided allopathic treatment. I was fortunate that he
confided in me, saying, “I do not have faith in any
doctors. If they demand to operate, I may die.” I told
him that he could not die; he had too much important
sevā to do. He agreed and said that he was very
determined to fulfill his gurudeva’s order to preach all
over the world. I said that I knew of a bona fide doctor
here in Mathurā who had cured others. He let me take him
there, and I stayed by his side during the entire
operation. I hesitate to mention these details, because
it may sound as if I was helping him. Actually, I know
he was bestowing his mercy to allow me to perform
intimate service.

We would often visit each other’s rooms, and sometimes
we would joke together about various topics. He was very
fond of joking, and when he would laugh it was very
sweet. He joked in an especially delightful way, with a
slightly playful smile. We also had many philosophical
discussions together, speaking about such topics as
Prahlāda-caritra and Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
We read many scriptures together, and he would deeply
discuss the matters he wrote about in the Gauḍīya
Patrika. Sometimes he would have talks with one, two,
three or five disciples of my gurudeva in my room. There
were also some big officers and other important
gentlemen who came to hear him speak, and they would
say, “Oh, Abhaya Caraṇa Bābu is such a learned and
advanced person!” Everybody would glorify him.

Prabhu was very enthusiastic about cooking, and he often
declared that all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas should be expert in
cooking for Kṛṣṇa.

                           10
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017


During the many months he stayed at Keśavajī Gauḍīya
Maṭha, the two of us would perform sundara-ārati
together each evening. He would always play the mṛdaṅga
very expertly, and I would play the kartālas and sing.
He liked my singing very much and always requested me to
lead the kīrtana. Someone asked me, “Why doesn’t Prabhu
also sing? He has a beautiful voice as well.” I replied,
“Yes, surely he does, but there are times he doesn’t
sing because he is experiencing intense devotional
feelings and weeping.” I have heard this also on some of
his cassette recordings.




Accepting Sannyāsa




He had been the manager of Bengal Chemicals and was so
expert that he had arranged another company himself. But
there were problems. He had come to Allahabad and
managed a very big medical shop, but after some time
that also had difficulty. He then engaged in a little
more business, but Kṛṣṇa would not allow it to continue.
Then he came here.

As we once talked together in 1959, sitting side-by-
side, Prabhu said, “When I first met Śrīla Prabhupāda,
and when he gave me initiation, he told me that I should
preach in English in Western countries. He also told me
this over twenty years ago in Calcutta.” He continued,
“That which I feared has come on my head, and now I see
that I cannot successfully remain in business.”

I replied, “Do not try for this anymore. You are not a
person to do anything associated with worldly business.
Kṛṣṇa and your gurudeva want you to preach in Western
countries. You have such important work to do, and you
are so qualified.” We laughed together about this in a
friendly way.

Guru Mahārāja and Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu were bosom
friends – they had lived and served together. Both were
intellectual giants and very erudite persons from high-
class families. So I now encouraged him to accept
sannyāsa from our gurudeva and then go to preach in
Western countries. Then, when my gurudeva later arrived
from Navadvīpa, I told him, “Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu
is your friend. He can obey you because you are elder.”
Gurudeva was a sannyāsī and Prabhu was in gṛhastha-veṣa
(the dress of a householder).

Earlier, when I had written to Gurudeva that pūjyapāda
Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu was staying here with us, he
told me, “He is my bosom friend. Show him all respect
and give him all facilities.” I had known him since
1947, and I realized how highly qualified he was.
Pūjyapāda Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja, Śrīla Śrauti
Mahārāja, and Guru Mahārāja would always give him great
respect and hear from him, even though he was a

                           11
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

householder. At this time, therefore, I requested my
gurudeva to apply some pressure so that he would take
sannyāsa. Gurudeva then called him and said, “Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja and all the other boys are encouraging that you
take sannyāsa. I also support this idea. Do not hesitate
to take the renounced order. You are so qualified.
Please take sannyāsa now. It will be very beneficial.”

Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu thus agreed to accept
sannyāsa, and the ceremony was held the very next day.
That day was the auspicious Viśvarūpa-mahotsava. Prabhu
asked me, “How should I prepare?” I told him, “Don’t
worry, I will arrange everything.” I prepared bāhira-
veṣa (sannyāsa dhotī), uttarīya (sannyāsa upper cloth)
and a daṇḍa with my own hands. I taught him how to wear
these, and then I performed the fire yajña. Akiñcanā
Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja came, and Śeṣaśāyī Brahmacārī,
Kuñja-vihārī Brahmacārī, Parijataka Mahārāja and many
other persons were also present. Now, most of these
devotees have departed.

Sanātana Prabhu took sannyāsa with him, after which he
became Bhaktivedānta Muni Mahārāja. He was ninety years
old and had said to him, “If you agree to take sannyāsa,
then so shall I.” He is also no longer here, having
joined the eternal service of Kṛṣṇa.

I recited the yajña-mantras and performed the ceremony.
Akiñcanā Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, Prabhu’s intimate
godbrother and friend, chanted Hare Kṛṣṇa continuously,
from 8:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m., in a most sweet and deep
manner.

My gurudeva then gave Prabhu the sannyāsa-mantra. The
sannyāsa name which he gave him is “Swāmī.” This is one
of the bona fide sannyāsa names; it means “controller”
and “master.” The title “Bhaktivedānta” had already been
awarded in Calcutta by some of his godbrothers, and
“Mahārāja” is a formal ending for those in the renounced
order.

This name “Swāmī” was just fitting because Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja became the controller of
many, many jīvas’ hearts, due to his being strong and
faithful to his gurudeva. This is why we affectionately
call him “Swāmīji,” not in any common way but showing
the greatest respect. (See Endnote 4.)

After the ceremony, Gurudeva requested Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja to speak. He spoke in
English, although almost everyone present could not
understand that language. He explained that just at this
time he remembered his gurudeva’s specific orders to
preach in the English language. He said, “I feel
fortunate to accept sannyāsa from my godbrother, Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. I have known
him for a long time and he is my close friend. He is a
very bona fide disciple of our jagad-guru Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He has kindly given
me this sannyāsa order, and Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and
Śrīla Muni Mahārāja have also given me inspiration to do
this. The order of sannyāsa means to preach the mission
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the mission of the guru
everywhere. My gurudeva instructed me to preach in

                           12
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

English, in Western countries, and that is why I am
writing English articles and books. I am praying to
Kṛṣṇa, Gurudeva and all the Vaiṣṇavas that they give me
the power to preach this mission all over the world.”

Excerpts from his speech and a description of the
ceremony were printed in a news article in our Bhāgavata
Patrika. The well-known photograph of our gurudeva
sitting between Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja and
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Muni Mahārāja was taken on that day.
Kuñja-bihārī Brahmacārī was formerly a wealthy devotee
and had previously helped build our maṭha financially;
so now he gladly donated the five paisa he had saved for
a photographer’s snapshot. Thus, today, we can all honor
this sannyāsa portrait.

It was a special privilege for us to participate in
assisting Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja in
accepting sannyāsa. For the next three days after the
ceremony, Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja stayed together with
him in his room. They were especially close and
confidential with each other. After this, Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja went to Agra to preach at a program he had
arranged. He was always coming and going, engaged in
guru-sevā. We kept his room open for him for the next
five years, and during that time he wrote some of his
books, like Easy Journey to Other Planets, here. His
three volumes of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam were not printed yet,
so he continued writing and editing them here. The
manuscripts were then given to the press in Delhi and
gradually published. He was also writing Back to Godhead
and other publications. He had done some translating
before, in Calcutta and Allahabad, but here he was
easily able to concentrate and thus he accomplished so
much.

Some persons don’t consider the taking of sannyāsa to be
very valuable or of much importance, but it is actually
so important. I think that if Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja had
not taken sannyāsa, perhaps he would not have done what
he did in Western countries. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja
himself explains in his books that it is favorable to
accept the renounced order for preaching. In India,
everyone has honor for sannyāsīs. In sannyāsa, one gives
up something but gains everything. As explained in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: mukunda sevana-vrata. A sannyāsī
thinks, “I only love Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. I
don’t know anything else.”

The sannyāsa-mantra is very helpful in attaining the
kṛṣṇa-prema which Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī and all the other Gosvāmīs have tried to
give us, and this is superior to all supermost
attainments. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to give this
type of kṛṣṇa-prema, and therefore the taking of
sannyāsa is very important. Don’t think it is a minor
point.




At Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira


                           13
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017




Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja and I are godbrothers in regards to
sannyāsa. I had taken sannyāsa before him, in 1954, and
he took sannyāsa in 1959. However, I always considered
him my superior and behaved towards him as my śikṣā-
guru, but Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja never treated me as a
disciple. Rather, he always accepted me as a bosom
friend. He had me sit on the same seat with him while we
were chanting japa, performing kīrtana, and also
sometimes making capātīs together. He would roll the
capātīs and I would put them on the fire, and then we
would offer them.

We would also sit on the same bed together. One time I
came to visit and gave him my cādara, because he had no
cādara to put on his bed. He had only one torn quilt
there. The walls were crumbling, but he was too absorbed
in his bhajana and sevā to care for that. He performed
intense tāpasya and sādhana in that kuṭīra, in that most
sacred tīrtha. I feel fortunate to have received his
association there.

During those years at Rādhā-Dāmodara, he was consumed in
the writing of his translations and purports of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. Whenever I visited him, I would try to offer
him assistance. In those days I was editing the Patrika,
which left me very little time. Still, we would often
associate together there in his small bhajan-kuṭīra.
Sometimes we took prasadam with the Rādhā-Dāmodara
Gosvāmīs. He and I also performed parikramā of Rādhā-
Dāmodara, walking together and paying respects at the
samādhis of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura,
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī,
and especially Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.




Preparation and Departure for America




Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja spent considerable time in Delhi
before he went to America, because this is where he was
printing and distributing his books. He published three
volumes of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam there. I went there several
times to be with him, and we stayed together in his
rooms at the Chippiwada Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Temple.

He preached vigorously in Delhi; wherever he went, he
preached to the public. He spoke about Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s mission to everyone he met,
and he also engaged me beside him. Then, when he was in
America, he wrote and encouraged me to continue
preaching to the people he had cultivated there. (See
Endnote 5.)

When Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was leaving to go to America,
he described everything to me about his travel plans. He
told me how, in Bombay, he had been given a ticket to

                           14
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

travel across the Atlantic Ocean to Boston by freighter,
and he described his route and his arrival there. He had
great faith and a careful preaching strategy. His goal
was to set up Vaiṣṇava institutes and dormitories there.
Showing great confidence in the holy name, he said that
even if at first the new students felt that they must
take meat or wine, he would do what was necessary to
begin their bhakti. He asked me to accompany him, and I
begged him that I could not go without the permission of
my gurudeva, who had ordered me to manage the maṭha in
Mathurā.

One day he announced to me, “Now the time has come and I
am going.” He was leaving for the Port of Calcutta and
was to visit Māyāpura also. I came and said good-bye,
and I took his footdust and put it on my head. Before he
left he requested me to keep a regular correspondence
with him, which I did, and we wrote many letters to each
other in those next years. A few of these letters are
printed in the pamphlet Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Letters from
America. Unfortunately, most of his other letters to me
were loaned and have not yet been returned.

Later he wrote me to send him his books from his room in
Mathurā, where many of his thick volumes were stored in
his cabinet. His books were very dusty, and I cleaned
and packed many boxes of them for an entire day. I then
shipped those books by boat to New York. When we visited
his rooms at the Los Angeles Temple in 1996, I was
touched to see several of those same books still there
in his bookshelves. I tried faithfully to perform all
the services he requested.




Return to India




When he returned to India in 1967, I met him and his
disciple, Kīrtanānanda dāsa, at the airport in Delhi. He
had instructed me to do this in his telegram. When we
met, he told me many wonderful accounts and details
about his preaching in America, and how miraculous were
the results. Humbly, he felt that all this was only the
mercy of his gurudeva, and the desire of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and His associates. One special thing he told
me was how he first chanted the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra
in Tompkins Square Park in New York City. Chanting for
several hours, he had kept his eyes closed, deeply
hearing and depending completely on that mercy.

We stayed together in Delhi for seven days at the
Chippiwada Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Temple. Because Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja was sometimes feeling ill, he would send me
along with Kīrtanānanda dāsa to represent him in his
preaching programs. He always encouraged us to preach
very strongly. He wanted everyone to see his Western
Vaiṣṇava, and so he took us to chant and preach to
people he knew in Delhi.


                           15
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

After a few weeks, another of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s
disciples, Acyutānanda dāsa, came to stay in Vṛndāvana.
Because these two were Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s disciples,
I sat together with them and honored the mahā-prasāda
they had prepared. All the caste Gosvāmīs, and almost
all of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s godbrothers, would never
take any prasāda or even the water that Kīrtanānanda
dāsa and Acyutānanda dāsa offered them. The reason they
refused was that those disciples were Westerners and had
previously eaten flesh. I spoke out against this policy
and encouraged others to accept Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s
disciples as bona fide. I explained how Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja’s preaching to foreigners was completely
authorized and directly in the line of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and our guru-varga. I think that most of the
Indian Vaiṣṇavas have now accepted this.

During this first trip back to India in 1967, Parama-
pujyapāda Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja came to visit my
gurudeva, his sannyāsa-guru. At that time, my gurudeva
was in weak health and was confined to his bed in
Calcutta. They had a confidential visit then, and this
was their last time together in this world. My gurudeva
was overjoyed at Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s devotional
service to their Śrīla Prabhupāda. He expressed his
appreciation and glorified his extensive preaching, and
he pledged to cooperate in that preaching work.

They also discussed my gurudeva’s helping to arrange a
donation of land for Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s future
Māyāpura temple. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja
and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja were also
present on that occassion.

After Śrīla Gurudeva departed from this world in 1968,
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, along with his disciples, sent us
a telegram of condolence.

He also sent a long letter to Śrīla Trivikrama Mahārāja
in Navadvīpa. He also delivered a lecture about Śrīla
Gurudeva in Seattle, Washington, and there he described
the history of his awarding him sannyāsa. He spoke about
the great appreciation and affection he had for him, and
how he had now entered Kṛṣṇa’s abode. We heard later
from some of his disciples that he shed tears when he
received the telegram telling of our gurudeva’s entering
nityā-līlā.

In his letter to Śrīla Trivikrama Mahārāja, Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja asked him to send a photo of Gurudeva, because
he wanted to place it on his temple altars in the West.
He also wrote and asked me to send a picture to him. I
remember that in one letter he requested me, “Please
send me a picture of your gurudeva so I can have a
portrait painted for displaying with our disciplic
succession in all of our temples.” (See Endnote 6.)
Somehow we were never able to arrange that, but I know
that if we had been able to, he would have used it.




Preaching in India

                           16
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017




In 1969, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja came again to Navadvīpa,
and stayed for a week or two with a large group of
disciples at our Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha. Nikuñja
Brahmacārī and others helped give everyone
accommodations, special prasāda and mosquito nets, and
made all other arrangements.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was looking for land in Māyāpura,
desiring to make an āśrama and mandira there, but the
inhabitants of Navadvīpa told him that he should do it
in Navadvīpa Town. They said that the birthplace of
Mahāprabhu was there in Prācīna Māyāpura, and they tried
to convince him to make his temple there. But he
decided, “No, I will not do that. I will establish it on
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s side.” This is where Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura had established Māyāpura and
Yogapīṭha, on the eastern bank of the Gaṅgā, across from
Navadvīpa town. At that time it was the rainy season and
the land was flooded everywhere but, even so, Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja traveled to the other side of the Gaṅgā
to arrange for purchasing his land.

On one occasion, some of his godbrothers in Māyāpura
suggested to him that he not allow himself to be called
“Śrīla Prabhupāda.” They also feared that he was not
preaching the purest devotional standards but was,
rather, altering the strict Gauḍīya Maṭha process too
much, out of deference to the Westerners. I defended
him, saying, “I don’t believe this. He has not given
anything new. Far and wide, in the English language, he
is preaching our same mission ‘in a new bottle.’ Nothing
is new, and I don’t see anything wrong. He has
wonderfully preached this mission of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura everywhere. If his disciples truly follow guru-
bhaktā (guru and Vaiṣṇavas), they will continue his
line. I don’t believe that just because he is doing some
revolutionary preaching it is a problem. He is
marvelously executing his gurudeva’s orders.”

I also explained, “They may call their gurudeva
‘Prabhupāda’ or ‘oṁ viṣṇupāda.’ I think in the future
age, more disciples in the line of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda might also call another qualified
spiritual master ‘Śrīla Prabhupāda,’ because it has been
allowed in śāstra. Disciples of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda who had agreed that they
would not take this name, out of deference to him, can
keep that agreement; but because of his high bhakti and
world preaching, and because of their devotion for him,
if Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s disciples call him ‘Śrīla
Prabhupāda’ there is no harm. If you want to reject him
for this reason, I don’t agree.” Śrīla Śrīdhara
Mahārāja, myself and a few others explained this to the
other devotees, especially in private.

On a few occasions, some of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s
godbrothers in Māyāpura directly asked him why he
accepted the name “Śrīla Prabhupāda,” and we once heard
the explanation he gave to them. He humbly told them,

                           17
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

“When Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura left this
world, some of the godbrothers took everything of his
mission, including his names like ‘om visnupāda’ and
‘paramahaṁsa.’ All that remained for me was my
‘Prabhupāda’ himself. He is my Prabhu, my master, and I
am always at his padā, his feet. His feet are my only
possession and shelter. So when my young disciples began
to call me that, I considered it to be true. If anyone
calls me ‘Śrīla Prabhupāda’, I only remember my
gurudeva’s lotus feet and how I am situated there. If
others think that I am an offender or proud, I request
them to please accept my understanding.”

During the following years, 1970–1977, I was constantly
traveling and preaching throughout India. Because our
gurudeva had departed from this world, I was very busy
with management affairs in our maṭhas. Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja was also very busy during those years,
continually travelling around the world, so he and I
were not able to meet together often. Unfortunately, I
was not there for the opening of the Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma
Mandira, which was established in 1975, near the time of
Gaura Pūrṇimā. He invited me, but I was not in Mathurā
at that time, because we were so busy in Navadvīpa.
During most of those years, I was not regularly present
in Mathurā, so he did not come back to visit our Maṭha.
If I had been present when he was in Vṛndāvana, I would
have invited him and he would have come.

In the earlier days of his preaching in the West, many
of us wanted to directly help him, but the time was not
ripe. There were only a few of us living in the maṭha
then, and we were all busy preaching in India. We were
not doing as much preaching as he was, but we were busy,
and my gurudeva had ordered me to render certain
services. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was busy on a big scale
and we were busy on a little scale, but both of us were
busy serving guru and Gaurāṅga.

Another difficulty was that in those early days most
devotees knew very little English, especially in the
matter of speaking. Therefore, although there were some
who were very strong in bhakti, they were not able to
meet and communicate with the Westerners.

At that time, there were some high-class devotees who
did not externally manifest themselves as being
qualified. I knew of about ten or more Indian devotees,
including some of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s godbrothers and
others who were initiated by them, who came to serve
with him in India when ISKCON was newly established
there. Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, Dīna-bandhu Bābājī
Mahārāja, Govardhana Prabhu, Ananda Prabhu from Orissa
and several others came. But they did not know English
and they appeared to be insignificant, so hardly any of
the Westerners understood their qualities. Now almost
everyone can speak English, but not then. Although we
could not personally join Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, many of
us were very proud and overjoyed that he was preaching
so gloriously.




                           18
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt              5/5/2017


CHAPTER TWO : ŚRĪLA PRABHUPĀDA’S DISAPPEARANCE LĪLĀ




Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Desire to go to Govardhana




(Excerpts from a Mathurā Class, 1993)

In his last days, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja requested his
disciples, “Take me to Govardhana. I want to go there
just now. I don’t want to go by car. I will go by
bullock cart, like Nanda Bābā, Yasoda-maiya, all the
gopīs, and all the Vrajavāsīs.” He wished for this
opportunity, but he could not go; I knew this fact.
Actually he went there with his soul, his transcendental
body. He is always there among Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, by
tad-anurāgi janānugāmī (following those eternal
residents of Vṛndāvana who possess inherent spontaneous
attachment for Śrī Kṛṣṇa (see Nectar of Instruction,
Verse 8)).

His desire was to go to Govardhana, and He also
expressed his real intention in the matter of this
desire: “Govardhana, please give me residence near you.”
In all of Vraja-maṇḍala, Gokula is the best place,
because Gokula is where Kṛṣṇa was born from the womb of
Yaśodā and where He performed His childhood pastimes. In
Gokula there is a multitude of cows, gopīs, and gopas,
and the main gopa is Kṛṣṇa. He resides in Gokula, which
includes Nandagrāma, Varṣāṇā, Kāmyavana, and Vṛndāvana.
In all of Gokula, Vṛndāvana is the best place, and in
Vṛndāvana, Govardhana is best. In all of Govardhana, his
two eyes, Rādhā-kunda and Syama-kunda, are the best. The
sweetest and most attractive pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa take place there. Parama-pujyapāda Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja therefore wanted to go to that place, because
the best of all Their pastimes is performed there.
There, rasa-līlā takes place in a special way. So much
attractive kṛṣṇa-līlā is enacted at Girirāja Govardhana,
and therefore devotees pray, “O Girirāja, please fulfill
my desire to witness these pastimes.” Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja wanted to go to Govardhana with the same idea
in mind.

His life’s ideal and principal desire was to give vraja-
prema to the world, but first he had to spend a long
time preaching vaidhī-bhakti, cutting away the jungle of
atheism and māyāvāda. He desired to translate the
Śrīmad-Bhagavatam in full, and especially to describe
elaborately the pastimes narrated in the Tenth Canto.
But Bhagavān called him back to His nityā-līlā.. Perhaps
Kṛṣṇa did not want him to remain in separation from Him
any longer, and therefore Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s desire
to go to Girirāja Govardhana was fulfilled by Bhagavān’s
calling him back to Girirāja Govardhana in Goloka
Vṛndāvana.


                           19
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

Girirāja Govardhana is our primary shelter because
prema-bhāva, the mood of pure ecstatic love, is the
highest there. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja wanted to relish
this pinnacle of kṛṣṇa-prema – and to distribute it to
the residents of this world. Therefore, like Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, and my own
worshipable gurudeva, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja
also wanted residence near Govardhana. Govardhana is the
best place in Vraja for both sādhakas and siddhas. If a
sādhaka who does not have prema performs bhajana there,
he will get prema; and if a perfected devotee goes
there, he will relish Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s nityā-līlā. He will
also receive darśana of the mahābhāva which is most dear
to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Those who are most intelligent want to serve the Divine
Couple Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa on the bank of Rādhā-
kunda. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja explains this in his Nectar
of Instruction. Such devotees want to be there; and if
they cannot be there in their body, they can live there
by mind and heart. Devotees like Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha Bhatta Gosvāmī,
and Śrīla Kṛṣṇadasa Kavirāja Gosvāmī -- all have
permanent seats there. Have you gone there? If you go
there with any high-class, advanced devotee, you may see
something, for everything is there. The Pāṇḍavas and
Draupadī are also there, performing ārādhana (worship)
of the gopīs. Those who are always present there in
their transcendental bodies, under the guidance of Sri
Rūpa-mañjarī and Sri Rati-mañjarī, are the topmost
devotees. We want to follow them. This is the mood of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
and also the mood of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja.

This is actually the highest glorification of Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja. If one does not understand this glory,
he is unfortunate because he is not actually touching
his glory. Such a person cannot glorify him properly.
Devotees must appreciate him for his most elevated
qualities, especially describing his highest love and
affection for Śrīmatī Rādhika. We should not desire that
all high-class devotees, uttama-bhāgavatas, come down to
the level of kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs. I know that Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja wanted to be there in Govardhana forever, and
to serve there. He actually realized the above-mentioned
prayer, written by Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.




Visiting Him in His Last Days




Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was becoming very ill, and our
Sukhānanda Prabhu was offering him naturopathic massages
with Ganges water. Before he went abroad to England,
Sukhānanda Prabhu came to Vṛndāvana for two hours every
morning and evening for fourteen days to massage him,

                           20
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

and these massages helped him. We also sometimes visited
and spoke with him then. Once we came at a time when he
had hardly eaten or even taken water for many days.
Still, he affectionately greeted us and, as he had
always done with all, he lovingly offered us the opulent
mahā-prasādam that had been prepared and offered by his
disciples. He exclaimed how nicely his young students
were trying to serve their gurudeva and Kṛṣṇa. Even
though he himself had eaten nothing at all for so long,
he made sure, in such a careful and affectionate way,
that each of us took prasāda to our full satisfaction.

Some godbrothers and associates were paying visits to
him in his room around this time. Akiñcana Kṛṣṇadāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja, Śrīla Bon Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhakti
Pramoda Purī Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhakti Vaibhava Purī
Mahārāja, Indupati Prabhu (from Śrīla Mādhava Mahārāja’s
temple), Ānanda Prabhu, and many more devotees came to
see him. We also came several times to be with him,
along with our brahmacārīs like Śeṣaśāyī Prabhu,
Śubhānanda Prabhu, Premānanda Prabhu, and sometimes
others. There are tape recordings of some of these
conversations, but most of them were in Bengali or
Hindi.

Just before Kārtika month in early October, when our
annual Vraja Maṇḍala parikramā was about to begin,
Parama-pūjyapāda Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja sent for me. He
requested his senior sannyāsīs and many others, “I want
to meet with Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.” A few of them then came
by car and requested me, “Śrīla Prabhupāda wants you, so
please come now.” I was in the midst of giving evening
discourse to our parikrama party, but I came
immediately.

When I arrived in his room at Kṛṣṇa-Balarama Mandira, he
was quite silent. Some boys were singing the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mahā-mantra, and some sannyāsīs and other disciples were
silent. After some time he opened his eyes and indicated
with his eyes for me to come close. He was so
enthusiastic before his death – not his death, no – his
entering kṛṣṇa-līlā. He was not speaking, but when he
saw me he showed his happiness. The devotees were
chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa very softly in Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja’s special tune, and all could see that he was
not speaking now.

I offered praṇāma to him, śāntyā praṇāma (standing and
silent), because I saw that there were many persons
present and no space for me to offer full pranāma. When
he saw me he at once said, “Oh, Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has
come.” He wanted me to take a seat on his bed. He tried
to sit up, but I put my hands on him and said, “Please
lie down, and I will sit over here.” He then motioned
for me to come nearer to his bed and said, “I want to
speak to you.” He wanted me to sit closer to his ear, so
he told some disciples, “Bring a chair,” and I sat on it
near to his ear.

First he began to weep; his heart was melted. From the
core of his heart he told me, “Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, can
you excuse me? I feel that there is cause for you to
forgive me. For the sake of preaching I have told my
disciples some things, which perhaps I should not have

                           21
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

said. Also I spoke very strongly about my godbrothers in
one letter, which was then sent to everyone. I said that
we are preaching and others are not, that they are
kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs who don’t preach but are idle. I said
that none of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas helped me – that they
only take mahā-prasādam and sleep.”

At this time, many of his sannyāsī disciples were
watching. His words and mood implied to me many things
about how he had wanted to encourage his young students.
As we are careful with babies, so he had sometimes
instructed some of them not to mix with his godbrothers
and the other Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. To save his newcomers
from becoming disturbed or confused, he sometimes told
them not to visit anywhere else. One reason was that a
few of his godbrothers had done some wrong things. Also,
his disciples did not understand the Indian ways of
indirect, subtle meanings. Also, he did not want them to
lose heart due to criticism from any Indian Vaiṣṇavas
who may not have understood their sensitivities and his
style of training them.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja had been a member of the Gauḍīya
Maṭha for a very long time and he knew the regulations
and siddhānta – but he could not teach all his disciples
everything in just a few years. He had been cultivating
many Vaiṣṇava Westerners from different countries, but
they still lacked our Vedic culture and sadācāra
(devotional habits). He had given his young disciples
instructions to avoid other Vaiṣṇavas, just to protect
them from becoming discouraged. He would say, “Although
they are not fully trained, their devotional attitude is
so nice. I am praying to Guru Mahārāja and the rūpānuga-
guru-varga to bless them all. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, and Śrī Baladeva Prabhu will
surely give them their mercy.”

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was remembering all these things,
and he now requested me, “Kindly tell the other
Vaiṣṇavas that I have made this offense, and to please
excuse me. I have so much sorrow for this.” I told him,
“You are my śikṣā-guru and a pure Vaiṣṇava. I know that
you cannot do anything that is not in the line of
bhakti. You have done these things only for the purpose
of serving your gurudeva and Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and we
also do this. All of us are indebted to you; there is no
question. We know the prediction: “pṛthivīte āche yata
nagarādi grāma.” You have performed a miracle; you have
spread His glories everywhere. We don’t think that you
have done anything wrong, so I have nothing for which to
excuse you. But I will relay your request to the senior
Vaiṣṇavas. You are my śikṣā-guru; whatever instructions
you give me I will follow with absolute sincerity.”
Tears were very sweetly falling from his eyes. He was
acting in such a humble way, as if he was not a good
Vaiṣṇava; but actually he was like Śrīla Narottama dāsa
Ṭhākura and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.

He continued, “Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura Prabhupāda ordered all of us to preach in Europe
and America. That was his strong desire. His other
desire was that we all work together to preach. I didn’t
waste a single moment. I tried my best, and to some
extent it has been successful.” His voice was choked

                           22
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

with emotion as he continued to speak: “If we can work
conjointly, then, as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu declared,
this saṅkīrtana movement has great possibilities.”

Then he told me, “I want you to help take care of my
disciples. I want them to be good and qualified
devotees. If they come to you, please care for them.”
Many of his disciples were nearby, so he softly
whispered in Bengali, “When I went to the West, I caught
so many monkeys in my net. Really, they are very expert
in quarreling among themselves like that. They are still
very young and untrained. So I request you that after my
departure you will help them in every respect.”
Considering the implications of this order from my
śikṣā-guru, I hesitated. Then he grasped both of my
hands in his own, looked deeply into my eyes and asked
me to promise to help. Therefore I agreed, saying, “I
promise that according to my ability and my bhakti-
siddhānta-tattva (understanding of the conclusive
statements of bhakti), I will always be ready to help
them as you request.”

Then I told him, “I want to say something to them.”
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja at once became inspired and called
to them, “Oh, you should all come near and hear Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja. Please take into your hearts what he is
speaking.” Then I told them all, “Don’t think that Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja is leaving this world. Gurudeva is
eternal. You are fortunate to have such a bona fide guru
and Vaiṣṇava. You should try to preach his mission more
and more enthusiastically. If you are after material
things, you will find yourselves quarreling over name,
fame and worldly gain. You will not be following his
teachings. You will not be following his mission; you’ll
be doing wrong. So don’t pursue your own self-interest.
Give up all these things. To serve Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja,
and to preach his mission, you should be united with all
the devotees. Don’t quarrel with others over a small
point. Don’t expel anyone from this mission by finding
small faults. Try to behave like friends, with
brotherhood, and then you can preach. If you have
difficulty with any of these things, then, as Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja has requested me, you can come to me and
I will try to help you from the core of my heart.” They
all listened to me then, and this was recorded on a
cassette tape.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja turned his head slowly, looking
over the devotees as they gathered in closely. Then he
slowly lifted his hand, as if to call them to attention,
and said, “Listen to Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. Don’t fight
amongst yourselves. I have given all direction in my
books.” Then he lowered his hand.

After this Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja told me, “I pray to you
that you will put me into my samādhi with your own hand.
I don’t want to take samādhi from anyone else’s hands. I
think you are the proper person. After my samādhi,
arrange to celebrate my mahotsava separation festival.
You should give some amount of money to all the seven
temples in Vṛndāvana and to all the Gauḍīya Maṭhas. It
depends upon you how much – 201 rupees, 1001 rupees –
according to your discretion, whatever you recommend.
They should all hear these instructions and arrange to

                           23
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

pay. Arrange a mahotsava festival also in Mathurā and
invite all the senior Vaiṣṇavas to the feast. Invite all
the Vaiṣṇavas in Vṛndāvana. Do this for me, and again I
am telling you that you should always help my devotees.”



[EDITORS’ NOTE: For special insight into the historical
record, we have chosen to include here excerpts from the
transcription of an original taped recording. These
memories and personal insights were spoken in a temple
class shortly after Śrīla Prabhupāda’s departure by one
of his senior disciples, Bhāgavata dāsa, who had been
present at this same occasion described by Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja above. We pray that the assembled
Vaiṣṇavas will treat this information with sensitive
care, as such topics are generally not for public
discussion.]



“While Śrīla Prabhupāda was lying there, he assumed a
certain pose. But we couldn’t understand it. We just
thought he was lying on the bed. He had his hands in a
certain way, his head was in a certain way, his legs
were in a certain way, and he arched his body in a
certain manner. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja said, “Oh, he is
in such and such mudrā. It’s a type of mudrā.” He said,
“This is exhibited by someone in the last period before
he passes away. It indicates that he is dancing with
Kṛṣṇa. When he exhibits this form in the bed, it means
that he is dancing with Kṛṣṇa; it is a dancing pose.”
Some people may try to understand Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
relationship with Kṛṣṇa, but this indicated a specific
pastime.

“Then he brought in his brahmacārīs. He has a little
choir there in Mathurā. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and the
brahmacārīs began to sing Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī-pada. Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has a beautiful voice, a very baritone
voice: ‘Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī-pada, sei mora sampada.’ He
sang very, very slowly. Everyone was crying. The whole
room was in tears, and everyone was very, very shook up.
Then, as the night continued, the kīrtana continued on
and on.”



[This second account is a continuation of the previous
tape-recorded class, describing recollections of
November 14th, during Śrīla Prabhupāda’s final five
hours.]



“. . . Śrīla Prabhupāda started exhibiting extraordinary
activities. He started to roll back and forth on the
bed, back and forth, and he would flail his arms in the
air and then suddenly stop as if he was stunned. He
wasn’t speaking at all, and then he would groan. Then
suddenly he would belch very, very loudly, then he would
shed tears and tremble, and then he would roll again. In
this way he would continue on and on in so many
different postures.

                           24
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017


“At first everyone was horrified. Then Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja came, and he was the last one with whom Śrīla
Prabhupāda communicated. I don’t know what Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja said to him because I never asked him.
Someone should ask him that. He entered the room and
Śrīla Prabhupāda was shaking about, flailing his arms.
Then he went right up to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s ear and
whispered something. Then Śrīla Prabhupāda stopped, and
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja whispered something. Śrīla
Prabhupāda put up his hand and shook it like he had
given benediction. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja understood
what he meant, and then he put his hand down.”




His Divine Departure




When we arrived in those final hours on November 14th,
he was not speaking. I felt at that time, by seeing his
face, that he was fully remembering the pastimes of
Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. I think this was great mercy coming
from Kṛṣṇa, because he had served Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa for his
entire lifetime. For that special person, Kṛṣṇa
absorption is there. Entranced in this way, his eyes
were closed and he was exhibiting special symptoms. It
was a very touching scene. He had no pain, no
distraction. At that time his mouth was so beautiful. It
was like a blossomed rose, like a lotus.

These are the signs of a very great personality.
Otherwise, another may cry, “I am dying, I am dying,”
and the face will be so ugly. But he was never like
that. He was like a beautiful lotus flower. I knew what
he was doing. I have seen others also, including my
gurudeva, entering aprakaṭa-līlā (Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
pastimes). I have seen Pūjyapada Anaṅga-mohana
Brahmacārī, Śrīla Jagannātha Bābājī Mahārāja (a disciple
of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Prabhupāda), Śrīla Narasiṁha
Mahārāja, and Srila Padmanābha Mahārāja. I have seen
many devotees when they departed, so I could judge what
was transpiring. They would call out, “Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa” and
“Rādhe Rādhe.” There are particular signs at that
moment, which show that someone is remembering Kṛṣṇa,
and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja was exhibiting
all those signs. He was very beautiful and very exalted.
There was no sign of pain and no attachment to the body
or anything else. He was no longer anxious for his young
disciples, nor for any of the outward things he had
established in his Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. Now
there was nothing else – only remembering Kṛṣṇa.

Our brahmacārīs were softly singing some bhajanas. At
that time, I saw that he was fully satisfied, and thus I
was also fully satisfied. I knew then that he would
surely go soon, but there was no sign when he would go;
he would leave now, or in a short time. He had
previously talked with me, when he was in his external
consciousness, but he did not request me to stay. I was

                           25
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

not in a hurry, but I was thinking that just after my
leaving for Mathurā he would enter into nitya-līlā. We
left to return to Mathurā, and we were informed that he
departed a few hours later.

Shortly after that time, we returned to the Kṛṣṇa-
Balarāma Mandira and made all arrangements for his
mahotsava. According to his wishes, we took him on
procession to most of the important deities of
Vṛndāvana. There were so many of his disciples and other
persons chanting in that procession, and all of the
Vrajavāsīs came out into the streets to honor him. After
this, I prepared his body. I wrote the special mantras
on his chest and forehead with tilaka. I used salt for
his body, and then, following all of the proper Vaiṣṇava
procedures, I put his transcendental body into samādhi
with my own hand.




In Mādhurya-rasa




Prema cannot be contained within the material body. One
with a material body can attain up to the stage of
svarūpa-siddhi. Yet, we see that rasika-bhaktas (those
who are already internally situated in their exchanges
with Kṛṣṇa in His līlā) have prema and also appear in a
body. We should understand, therefore, that their body
is not a worldly material body. This body cannot bear to
hold prema. In such a mood of separation, it would burst
into pieces.

To understand this, we must perform sādhana-bhajana and
become qualified. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was always in
that mood, but he did not externally manifest it. He
kept it hidden within himself. He had to suppress all
his actual moods for his preaching purpose. His prema
was displaying itself inside, but it was not fully
manifest externally. Otherwise, all would have been
madness and the preaching would have been stopped. The
uddīpana (stimulus) was always there, but inside. When
he went to the West there was uddīpana for preaching. He
preached, “You are not your body,” and he preached Gītā,
Jagannātha worship, etc. At the end, he came back to
Vṛndāvana-dhāma, relishing all the internal moods, and
he was always deeply hearing and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. He
told us, “My home is in Vṛndāvana.” ‘Home’ means his
loving home, his real home.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was surely in mādhurya-rasa. Some
may say, why not sakhya-rasa? I am not denying this,
because everything is present in mādhurya-rasa. All
other rasas, like vātsalya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, and so on,
are included in mādhurya-rasa.

So it may be said that all rasas were in him; he was not
deprived of sākhya-rasa. He had written some statements
in his poems, and he had special affection for Gaura-
Nitai and Kṛṣṇa-Balarama. But he was certainly in

                           26
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

mādhurya-rasa, because his sannyāsa-guru, my gurudeva,
gave him the sannyāsa-mantra, the gopī-bhāva-mantra, in
our rūpānuga line. Just as Śrīla Rupa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and

his gurudeva were in this rasa, and just as he wrote in
his realizations, in the purports of his books, he was
surely in mādhurya-rasa.




CHAPTER THREE : MY MESSAGE IS ONE WITH HIS




Sometimes it sounds to some that I am speaking certain
things that Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has never said. When a
seed is planted, it will naturally grow into a tree with
branches. Are these branches not included in the
original seed? Are they coming from somewhere else?
Because it is a tree, all its parts will naturally
manifest; they are all hidden within the seed. Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja has written everything in his books. I am
not saying anything new. Everything that I speak is
coming directly and exclusively from the authentic
literatures of our ācāryas. I also try to give examples
from Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s own purports, in his own
words. So his tree will certainly grow. New leaves will
come and that same tree will give more and more shade.
As we water that tree, so many beautiful flowers and
fruits will come; that is sure. That watering process is
hearing, chanting and remembering hari-kathā.

Parama-pūjyapāda Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has planted many
seeds of bhakti. Some seeds are sprouting, some are
growing, and some have leaves – two leaves, four leaves,
six leaves and more. But there are also many seeds that
are drying up. Many devotees have lost their strength
and their faith. Some sannyāsīs are leaving sannyāsa,
and many sincere devotees are feeling disconnected and
disheartened. These creepers which Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja
has planted need water to be sprinkled upon them.

One Vaiṣṇava can never be exactly the same as another.
All details of expression cannot be identically the
same; there must be some difference. Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu are not exactaly the
same. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī are
in the same line but are not completely the same. The
leaves of any tree, like a mango tree, are not all the
same; there must be some difference. So we are also in
the family of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and therefore we
are included in the same tree. It cannot be said that
there is any real difference between us, since we are in
the same bona fide disciplic tree.

I was never interested in collecting many followers, and
I didn’t want to initiate many disciples. For a long
time I have been active as a śikṣā-guru for the devotees
in the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samītī. Similarly, I want to
offer śikṣā to anyone who is interested. Now I have

                           27
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

accepted Western dīkṣā disciples, but my original
intention was to help everyone become strong by śikṣā. I
want the devotees to benefit from the śikṣā of all bona
fide Vaiṣṇavas. I want them to advance more and more in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, to have love and affection for each
other and for all other Vaiṣṇavas. I want to see Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja’s movement become healthy and strong.

Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja tried to help in this same way,
because he was also requested by Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja.
He never called the devotees or tried to cause any
disturbance. Many were attracted and came and wanted to
hear hari-kathā, and he was distributing hari-kathā.
Other Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas are also doing this. We are
speaking hari-kathā here, and thus so many devotees are
thirsty to receive help. The concept and siddhānta of
śikṣā-guru and guru-tattva is not yet widely understood
and accepted. The śikṣā-guru does not compete with the
dīkṣā-guru. He assists the devotees in strengthening
their relationship with their dīkṣā-guru, and in
understanding and carrying out their dīkṣā-guru’s
conclusions. I am bound to serve Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja in these ways, because he is not only my
śikṣā guru, he is also my bosom friend.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s order to me was that I help his
devotees. If I am obeying him, then I may be disobeying
others. In any case, even if the whole world is on one
side opposing me, I will be on the other side, trying to
obey him. I only want to teach what is pure bhakti in
the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and all our ācāryas down
to Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja. I want to be
welcome in his temples, where he performed his pastimes.
I want to take his footdust, pay my respects, and
especially worship at his place of samādhi, which was
performed with my own hands. I have an open heart and
open arms; my door is always open to anyone. My
intention is to help everyone who comes to me, to
establish a beautiful temple in their heart where Śrī
Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa can be served.

I am praying at the lotus feet of my dīkṣā-gurudeva, and
at the lotus feet of my śikṣā-guru and priya-bandhu,
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja. May they bestow
their mercy on all of you and also on me. If after first
giving mercy to all of you there is some left, then may
they give it to me as well. From my heart, I care for
all of his followers who try to carry out his orders and
spread Kṛṣṇa consciousness. I am begging all of the
Vaiṣṇavas to be sympathetic to my attempt to serve the
lotus feet and mission of our beloved Srila
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja. He has kindly given me the
opportunity to serve him, and I am offering my heartfelt
puṣpāñjali at his lotus feet.




ENDNOTES




                           28
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

1. Rays of the Harmonist. Vol. 2 No. 1. “The Mission of
Śrīla Bhakti Prajnana Keśava Mahārāja”. Translation from
the Hindi article in Bhagavāta Patrika of Feb. 1998, by
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

(pg. 26–27).

During this unfavorable situation, around 1938–40, Śrī
Krti-ratna Prabhu (one of Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s brahmacārī names) had spent a few
days in Prayaga, at Śrī Rūpa Gauḍīya Maṭha. There he met
Śrīmad Abhaya Caraṇa Bhaktivedānta. These two
godbrothers had been intimate friends since 1922. Śrī
Abhaya Carana’s business in Prayaga was in an unstable
condition. In spite of this he still remained
enthusiastic to preach the message of bhagavad-bhakti,
and in fact both godbrothers were very enthusiastically
preaching the message of śuddha-bhakti in Prayaga and
Allahabad. . .

During this same period, in 1940, Śrī Vinoda-bihārī
Brahmacārī (Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja’s brahmacārī name) came from Māyāpura to the
town of Navadvīpa along with Pūjyapāda Śrīmad Bhakti
Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Narahari Brahmacārī
“Sevā-vigraha”, Śrīpāda Biracandra Prabhu, and some
other godbrothers. At Navadvīpa, he founded Śrī
Devananada Gauḍīya Math in a rented house in the
locality of Tegharipada, and from there started the
preaching of śuddha-bhakti.

On April 7, 1940, the day of akṣaya-tṛtīya, pūjyapāda
Śrī Vinoda-bihārī Brahmacārī Kṛtī-ratna founded Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samītī at 33/2 Bosapada Lane, Calcutta,
in a rented house. At that time Pūjyapāda Abhaya
Caraṇāravinda Bhaktivedānta, Śrī Nṛsiṁhānanda
Brahmacārī, Śrīpāda Kṛṣṇa-kāruṇya Brahmacārī, Śrīpāda
Sajjana-sevaka Brahmacārī (the present ācārya of the
Samītī, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja) and many
other Vaiṣṇavas were present.”

2. Their Lasting Relation. “Letter of Condolence” from
Śrīla Prabhupāda to Śrīla Trivikrama Mahārāja. Seattle,
Oct. 22, l968 (pg. 37–38).

I have a very close connection with Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samītī. Yourself, and particularly Śrīpāda Vamana
Mahārāja, are well aware of the fact that I am one of
the three persons who founded Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samītī. We had conceived of the idea of the formation of
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samītī at Bosapada Lane, Calcutta,
even before Śrīla (Bhakti Prajnana Keśava) Mahārāja
accepted sannyāsa.



3. Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Letters from America to Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. Return address c/o Gopal Agarwal from
Butler, Penn. Sept. 28, 1966. (pg. 15)

I received your letter dated September 20, 1966, on
time. Our relationship is certainly based on spontaneous
love. That is why there is no chance of us forgetting
one another. By the mercy of guru and Gauranga, may

                           29
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt             5/5/2017

everything be auspicious for you. This is my constant
prayer. From the first time I saw you I have been your
constant well-wisher. At his first sight of me, Śrīla
Prabhupāda also saw me with such love. It was in my very
first darśana of Śrīla Prabhupāda that I learned how to
love. It is his boundless mercy that he has engaged an
unworthy person like me in fulfilling some of his
desires. It is his causeless mercy to engage me in
preaching the message of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Raghunātha.



4. A Note on the Word “Swāmījī”’

His Divine Grace Srila A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Prabhupāda was addressed by many names throughout his
life. His parents gave him the birth name, Abhaya Caraṇa
De. At his initiation by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Thakura, he became Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu. Later,
in 1939, he was honored by an assembly of his
godbrothers with the title Śrī Bhaktivedānta. During his
gṛhastha years, many of his friends affectionately
called him Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu, Abhaya Babu
Prabhu, or Prabhu. These references are shown in the
Līlāmṛta, and Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja also recalls them.
In 1959, during his sannyasa ceremony, Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmi Mahārāja awarded him the formal
name ‘Swāmī’; and he became known as Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Maharaja.

‘Swāmī’ with ‘jī’ (Swāmijī) is actually a designation of
special respect and intimacy. At first, Prabhupada’s
disciples addressed him as Swāmiji but, as this is not
proper for ordinary diksa disciples, his disciples and
followers later addressed him as ‘Śrīla Prabhupāda’
(representative of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa). Because the
devotees in the Gauḍīya Maṭha have, for over a century,
been accustomed to addressing Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Thakura as ‘Śrīla Prabhupāda’, to avoid
confusion, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja generally refers to
him by his sannyāsa name, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja, or Swāmijī. Because of his extremely intimate
relationship with our Prabhupāda, this is proper.

Many Western devotees will hear Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja uttering the name ‘Swāmijī’ with
reference to our Śrīla Prabhupāda. Although Śrīla
Mahārāja always sees Śrīla Prabhupāda as his śikṣā-guru,
because they were also intimate friends, he often uses
this affectionate name. Some devotees misunderstand,
thinking he is showing insufficent respect by not always
saying ‘Prabhupāda’, but actually he sees him in the
most glorious light. When others, those who are not on
his level, his own disciples and also Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
disciples, imitate him by using the word ‘Swāmijī’ and
not uttering the traditional proper honorific titles,
Śrīla Mahārāja corrects them.



5. Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Letters from America to Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. From Butler, Penn., on Sept. 28,
1966.


                           30
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt              5/5/2017

My room is locked in Delhi. If you or any of your
faithful preachers want to preach in Delhi, let me know.
If you want to work in Delhi, you can use that room and
preach. If you continue going to Delhi, then my
publication work can be taken care of under your
observation. You wrote to me, “You can engage me in any
preaching work in India, and according to my ability I
shall always be ready to do so.” So I can preach whole-
heartedly by your good wishes.



6. Their Lasting Relation. “Letter of Condolence”.

P.S. If you have any nice photograph of Śrīla Mahārāja,
then kindly send it to me. I will get a life size oil
painting made of it, and, along with a picture of Śrīla
Prabhupāda, I will place it in my prominent centers,
particularly New York, Hollywood, London, and so forth.



Table of Contents

CHAPTER ONE : OUR FIRST YEARS TOGETHER

CHAPTER TWO : ŚRĪLA PRABHUPĀDA’S DISAPPEARANCE LĪLĀ

CHAPTER THREE : MY MESSAGE IS ONE WITH HIS

INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER ONE : OUR FIRST YEARS TOGETHER

His Association with Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Founding Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti

Our First Meeting

Editorial Sevā

Jhansi

Residing in Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha

Accepting Sannyāsa

At Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira

Preparation and Departure for America

Return to India

Preaching in India

CHAPTER TWO : ŚRĪLA PRABHUPĀDA’S DISAPPEARANCE LĪLĀ

Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Desire to go to Govardhana

Visiting Him in His Last Days

His Divine Departure

                           31
My_Siksa_Guru_and_Priya_Bandhu.txt           5/5/2017


In Mādhurya-rasa

CHAPTER THREE : MY MESSAGE IS ONE WITH HIS

ENDNOTES




                           32
