Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt            5/5/2017

Secrets of the Undiscovered Self



His Divine Grace

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




Dedication

Preface

We Are Pure Spirit Souls

We Are Not These Bodies

A King in Illusion

We Are Part and Parcel of the Supreme Self

The Nature of the Supreme Self

The Process of Self-Realization

The Bona Fide Guide




Dedication


I beg the mercy of my Gurudeva, nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti-prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja. I offer thousands of humble obeisances unto
his lotus feet, and the same humble obeisances unto the
lotus feet of my siksa-guru, nityalīlā praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja.

In the present day, it was my siksa-guru who unlocked
the treasure of Vedic wisdom for the entire world. The
key to the treasure is in his hands and in my Gurudeva's
hands. They have given me their key, and they have
ordered me to share that treasure with you all.

Tridaṇḍi-bhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



Many participated in completing the publication of this
booklet in the role of editors, editorial advisors,
designers, artists, typists, transcribers, proofreaders
and technical assistants. They include: Śrīpāda
Bhaktivedānta Mādhava Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Bhaktivedānta
Vaikhanas Mahārāja, Atula-kṛṣṇa dāsa, Ānītā dāsī,
Bhūdhara dāsa, Brajanātha dāsa, Dhanañjaya dāsa,
Giridhārī dāsa, Gaurāṅgi dāsī, Gurūttama dāsa, Jaya-
gopāla dāsa, Mahaprābhu dāsa, Nanda-kiśora dāsa,
Nandimukhi dāsī, Nāndinī dāsī, Premavatī dāsī, Rādhā-

                           1
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017

kānta dāsa, Śānti dāsī, Sudarśana dāsa, Sundara-gopāla
dāsa, Śyāmarāṇī dāsī, Vaijayantī-mālā dāsī, Vasanti dāsī
and Viśvambhara dāsa.

Special thanks to all the book distributors, for helping
to bring this publication to our respected readers.




Preface


The purpose of this booklet is to introduce the readers
to the beauty and wonder of their own natural being.
Sages say that our souls are each more brilliant and
powerful than thousands of suns, and that we come to
experience this by hearing from those who are self-
realized. Secrets of the Undiscovered Self is a
transcription of a discourse given by such a self-
realized personality, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, a pre-eminent saint and one of the
foremost teachers of divine wisdom in the present day.
He gave this discourse in March 2002, in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia.

The preface of this booklet contains the words of
another transcendental personality, Śrīla A.C.
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, famous throughout the
world as Śrīla Prabhupāda, who is intimately related
with Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja as an
instructing guru and a dear friend. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja regards Śrīla Svāmī Mahārāja as a main
inspiration for his regularly traveling the surface of
the globe and teaching the secrets of the undiscovered
self.

Herein, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja gives an
analogy of a bird in a cage, comparing the bird to the
soul and the cage to the body that covers it. He writes,
“We are neglecting our real comfort and identifying the
material cage with ourselves. We have concentrated all
our energies for the meaningless upkeep of the material
cage for its own sake, completely neglecting the captive
soul within. The cage is meant for the undoing of the
bird; the bird is not meant for the welfare of the cage.
Let us, therefore, deeply ponder this. All our
activities are now turned toward the upkeep of the cage,
and the most we do is try to give some food to the mind
by art and literature. But we do not know that this mind
is also material in a more subtle form.”

“The self is beyond the gross body and subtle mind. He
is the potent active principle of the body and mind.
Without knowing the need of the dormant soul, one cannot
be happy simply with emolument of the body and mind. The
body and the mind are but superfluous outer coverings of
the spirit soul. The spirit soul’s needs must be
fulfilled. Simply by cleaning the cage of the bird, one
does not satisfy the bird. One must actually know the
needs of the bird himself.

“The need of the spirit soul is that he wants to get out

                           2
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017

of the limited sphere of material bondage and fulfill
his desire for complete freedom. He wants to get out of
the covered walls of the greater universe. He wants to
see the free light and the spirit. That complete freedom
is achieved when he meets the complete spirit, the
Personality of Godhead.”

Speaking in a simple yet profound manner, Śrīla Svāmī
Mahārāja elaborates on the difference between the body
and the soul: “If we meditate upon this body and study
whether or not the body is our true identity, we will
come to the conclusion that we are the knower of the
body – not the body. The body is simply the field of our
activities.

“This good intelligence applies even in a child. You may
show a child his finger and inquire, ‘What is this?’ The
child will reply, ‘It is my finger.’ The child will
never say, ‘I finger.’ Who am ‘I’? That should be the
inquiry.”

The histories in this booklet actually took place. They
have been taken by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja from the
parts of the Vedas called the Purāṇas and Upaniṣads. The
names of all the personalities herein are in the ancient
Sanskrit language. Following the tradition of our
spiritual preceptors, we use standard diacritical
markings to indicate the pronunciation of Sanskrit
words. Pronounce ā like a in father, ī like ea in neat,
ū like oo in root, ṛ like ri in rip, ṁ and ṅ like ng in
hung, ś and ṣ like sh in shy, and c like ch in chap.



The editor




We Are Pure Spirit Souls


Long ago there lived a powerful sage named Aṣṭāvakra
Ṛṣi. The sage was curved in eight parts of his body, and
when he walked his movements were quite peculiar and
awkward. He was also very ugly, and ordinary people
often laughed at the sight of him. Although externally
he was awkward and crooked, internally his heart was
pure because he had realized his eternal transcendental
identity. He knew and realized the difference between
the body and the soul.

Once, Aṣṭāvakra Ṛṣi arrived in the assembly of the great
king Mahārāja Janaka to attend an assembly of saintly
persons. As he entered the assembly, everyone present
began to laugh at him. Hearing them, Aṣṭāvakra Ṛṣi also
began to laugh. The members of the assembly were
surprised and said to each other, “We are laughing at
him, but he is laughing even more loudly than us. Why is
this?”

Janaka Mahārāja rose from his throne and asked Aṣṭāvakra
Ṛṣi, “Why are you laughing so loudly?”

                           3
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017


The sage replied, “I thought I was coming to join an
assembly of saints and sages, but instead I have
stumbled into a convention of shoemakers. A shoemaker’s
interest is only in leather and skin ; he sees only if
the good or bad quality of skin. Your interest is in
seeing if someone is beautiful or ugly, healthy or
disabled, young or old. Your minds are absorbed in these
temporary things. You are not seeing my soul as saintly
persons would. It is simply illusion to place importance
on the external, temporary body while being oblivious to
the eternal soul dwelling within.”

Janaka Mahārāja’s heart was deeply penetrated by
Aṣṭāvakra Ṛṣi’s words. He realized that the sage was a
liberated soul, and worthy of deep respect. With great
honor he offered his own throne to the sage, bowed down
to him, and accepted him as his instructing spiritual
master.




We Are Not These Bodies


The body is not the self. What is this material body? It
is a bag of bones, blood, urine and many other unclean
substances. The mind is also part of the material body
and is different from the soul. It experiences temporary
mundane emotions as real, thus causing much anguish and
only a little pleasure. We are individual souls, not
these bodies or minds.

These bodies are mortal; all the doctors and scientists
of this world cannot prevent old age. One day, twenty,
thirty or fifty years from now, the body will become
old. Its beauty and power will disappear; walking will
be difficult without the help of a cane, and after some
time death will come. At that time we will have to give
up everything we have accumulated during this lifetime.
Nothing in this world will be able to save us from
continued suffering – only God and Śrī Guru can save us
in all respects. If we realize this and engage in His
loving service, we will become happy.

As spiritual souls, we are all parts and parcels of the
same God, the Supreme Lord. Souls in all species of life
– from the lowest, such as plants and animals, to the
highest, such as humans and demigods – are His
infinitesimal parts and parcels. The ancient scriptures
of India, the Vedas, say, “God is one. Everything in
this world is merely an expansion of His power, or
energy.” Atheists, who don’t believe in God, believe in
the world of nature. They believe that everything comes
from nature and returns to nature. The world of nature
in which they have placed their faith, however, is
simply a part of the energy of that Supreme Lord.

We are minute parts of the Supreme, and we are the
manifestations of His marginal energy (tatastha sakti),
but unfortunately we have turned away from Him and have
forgotten who we are. We think that these material

                           4
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017

bodies are our real selves. We spend our days collecting
money and securing positions, thinking that these things
will make us happy – but this conception is totally
wrong.




A King in Illusion


[The history of Aṣṭāvakra Ṛṣi illustrates that we are
not these mortal bodies. The following history describes
how another great sage, Viśvāmitra Muni, helped another
righteous king to realize and correct his misconception
regarding his own identity. In days of yore, kings
greatly honored holy men, and therefore Viśvāmitra was
able to help him.]

In ancient India there lived a great and very powerful
emperor named Hariścandra. His wife’s name was Śaibya
and his beautiful young son was Rohitasva. Hariścandra
was extremely truthful; he never told a lie or tolerated
any untruth, and he was renowned throughout the world
for his generosity to all creatures. Although he
possessed such qualities, an exalted sage named
Viśvāmitra was concerned for his spiritual welfare.

Viśvāmitra thought, “The truth that Hariścandra follows
is merely worldly truth, and worldly truth has no real
value. Except for devotees of the Lord, no one in this
world can speak the actual truth. If I ask him, ‘What is
your name?’, he will say, ‘My name is Hariścandra.’ ‘Who
are you?’ ‘I am the Emperor.’ ‘Who is he?’ ‘He is my
son.’ ‘Who is she?’ ‘She is my wife.’ But in reality
there is only one truth: We are not mortal bodies. We
are spirit souls, servants of the Supreme Truth., the
Supreme Personality of godhead.”

Viśvāmitra Muni’s concern grew. He was convinced that
King Hariścandra’s happiness and eternal well-being
would lie only in a proper spiritual understanding, and
he was convinced that his misfortune would lie in his
lack of such understanding.

One night, by his mystic power, he appeared to the king
– by entering his dream – and he told him, “You are an
excellent king. You are very generous, a truthful
speaker and you worship God. Because you are so pious I
am confident that you will give me whatever I ask you
for. I want something from you.”

Hariścandra awoke from his sleep and replied,
“Certainly, I will donate anything you ask for.”

Viśvāmitra voiced his request, “I want your entire
kingdom.”

Hariścandra replied in his sleep, “Of course, I will
give it to you.”

By the next morning, after awakening, he forgot what had
happened in his dream.. Later that morning, Viśvāmitra

                           5
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt             5/5/2017

again approached him. He asked, “Do you remember any
dream you had last night?” “Yes, I remember.” “You gave
me your entire kingdom.” “I may have given it, but it
was only in a dream.” “No, it was not just a dream. I
actually came to you in your dream last night.”

Aware that by divine power great sages can go
practically anywhere and perform wondrous activities
that would appear to ordinary people as magic, the king
believed his words.

Viśvāmitra continued, “So now, in your fully wakened
state, you should say, ‘I vow to give you my kingdom.’”

Hariścandra said, “Yes, I vow that my kingdom is now
yours.

According to ancient Indian culture, if someone gives in
charity, he gives some a monetary donation (daksina)in
addition to his gift. Viśvāmitra therefore asked
Hariścandra to give him some additional money. “Without
a donation of coins,” Viśvāmitra said, “no vow is
complete. Something has to be given – even if it is only
one percent of the value of your gift.”

“How many coins would you like, O great sage?”
Hariscandra asked.

Viśvāmitra replied, “Ten thousand gold coins.”

Hariścandra immediately ordered his treasurer, “Give the
sage ten thousand gold coins.”

Viśvāmitra smiled and said, “Liar, it seems that you are
going back on your word. You gave me your entire
kingdom. Since your treasury is now also mine, how can
you instruct the treasurer to give me gold? You will
have to think of another way to give me this donation.”

Hariścandra agreed, and said that he would take a loan
from someone in the kingdom. But Viśvāmitra said, “The
citizens are also mine. You may not take a loan from any
of them.”

The king thought, “All I have left are my wife, my son
and myself – everything else is gone.” He told the sage,
“I will sell myself, my wife and my son, and then I will
pay you.”

Viśvāmitra replied, “You cannot sell yourself within my
kingdom. You can do so only outside.”

Since the kingdom of Hariścandra encompassed the entire
Earth, he was now quite perplexed as to what to do.
Viśvāmitra then said, “Although Kāśī is within my
kingdom, it is not considered part of this world. It is
the abode of the demigod Lord Śiva. If you go there you
will be outside my kingdom. You can go there to sell
yourself, but do not forget to pay me.”

Hariścandra, his wife and his son had to go to Kāśī by
foot, because his chariots and horses now belonged to
Viśvāmitra. After traveling for many days they finally
arrived in Kāśī and Hariścandra began calling out to the

                           6
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017

residents, to see who would purchase him. At that time a
low caste sweeper, the owner of a crematorium, told him
that he would purchase him if he would perform duties at
the cremation grounds. No one else had offered to
purchase him, so Hariścandra accepted and was paid five
thousand gold coins. To make up the other five thousand
gold coins, he sold his wife and child to a very cruel
person of the priestly caste (brahmana) and then he paid
Viśvāmitra the promised donation.

When someone sells a cow, he is no longer the owner of
that cow. Similarly, Hariścandra was not the king now,
nor was he the husband of his wife or the father of his
child. However, he still somewhat identified himself as
such. He thought, “I was a king. I am the husband of
Śaibya and the father of Rohitasva.”

After some time, by the mystic power of Viśvāmitra, a
snake bit Hariścandra’s son and killed him. It was late
at night during the rainy season and bitter winds now
blew along with a heavy downpour of rain. The cruel
brahmana owner of Śaibya told her, “Make your own
independent arrangements to cremate your child. I have
already spent money to purchase you and I will not spend
any more coins to cremate your son. Immediately take
this dead body away from here.”

So, on that dark night, the weeping Śaibya took her
son’s body in her arms and carried him to the cremation
grounds on the bank of the Ganges, the same cremation
grounds where her husband stood guard. Hariścandra did
not recognize her and, although she was poor and
destitute, he told her, “You cannot cremate this child
without paying the fee.” She had no money with which to
pay. All she had in the world was the dead body of her
son wrapped in her veil.

Just then a lightening bolt flashed, and Hariścandra saw
that it was his own wife standing before him. He never
expected to see his son there – dead – nor did he expect
to see his wife in her distressed and worn condition.
His heart broke and he began to weep, crying out, “Oh
God, what has happened?”

Now he was in a dilemma. He wept – but he tried to be
true to his new identity as a guard at the cremation
grounds. Being very strict in what he considered his
sense of duty, he told Śaibya, “Still you should pay me.
I am the watchman of this crematorium.”

“I have nothing to give,” she replied, “except half of
my veil.”

As Śaibya began to tear that veil, Viśvāmitra, along
with Lord Nārāyaṇa (one of the incarnations of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead), and demigods such as
Yamarāja (the lord of death) and Lord Brahmā (the
creator of the universe and the head of the demigods)
immediately appeared on the scene, calling out, “The
examination has ended!”

Viśvāmitra placed his hand on the dead body of the son
and said, “Rise quickly, my child!” Within a moment the
boy stood up, his eyes gazing toward the sky.

                           7
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017


Viśvāmitra told Hariścandra, “I took everything away
from you and now I am returning it. The kingdom is again
yours. With your new realizations, you are now qualified
to leave your worldly responsibilities and enter the
forest to meditate on God.

“O king! In this world no one can speak the truth, in
the real sense. You are not Hariścandra. This is the
name of your physical body. And what is this body made
of? It is a combination of blood, flesh, urine and
stool. When you think, ‘I am a father, husband, king and
so forth,’ how is it the truth? You, the soul within the
body, are the eternal servant of God. You are part and
parcel of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord. You are not of this
world. Try to serve God and chant His holy name.”

King Hariścandra had previously believed in some
conception of the Supreme and had dutifully worshipped
Him, but his heart was not devoted nor was he
surrendered to Him. He was devoted to the false truths
of this world. Therefore, even in his palace he could
never experience any happiness in truth. By the mercy of
Viśvāmitra Muni he achieved the full-fledged freedom of
his transcendental nature, the freedom for which every
living being is anxious. Moreover, an incarnation of the
Supreme Lord, Śrī Rāma, later appeared in his dynasty.

When Visvamitra left along with others, King Hariscandra
also went to the forest for engagining in devotional
service to the Supreme Lord after crowning his son
Rohitasva as his successor to the throne.

What would have taken many lives of endeavor to achieve,
he achieved in only a few moments by the arrangement of
the powerful sage. And, by that same arrangement, others
may learn from hearing this history from the Vedas.




We Are Part and Parcel of the Supreme Self


The Vedas instruct us, “Don’t live in darkness; move
toward the light.” “Light” refers to knowledge of our
true spiritual form, of the Supreme Lord of whom we are
minute parts and parcels, and of the eternal
relationship of loving service we have with Him. That
Supreme Lord is known in the Vedas as Lord Kṛṣṇa, which
means the all-attractive reservoir of complete pleasure,
knowledge and eternal existence. He has many
manifestations and they are all non-different from Him.
He is the supreme person we generally call God, Allah or
Jehovah. To serve Him in our constitutional or spiritual
form is light, and this service brings full and eternal
happiness.

“Darkness” refers to the state of spiritual ignorance.
To be in darkness or ignorance means to be attached to
objects related to this body and to have a sense of
possessiveness toward the things of this world. Everyone
in this world wants to be completely happy and no one

                           8
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017

wants to suffer. We can see, however, that despite
people’s endeavors to attain happiness since time
immemorial, they have not been truly successful.
Medicines, trains, airplanes and now computers have been
invented with the intention of creating convenience and
happiness, and new forms of entertainment have been
designed for this purpose. But has all this given anyone
lasting inner happiness? It is especially thought that
accumulating wealth can buy happiness, but who has ever
become permanently happy by becoming wealthy?

There is, however, a transcendental science, a spiritual
scientific process that leads one to eternal happiness
and puts an end to one’s cycle of birth and death. That
science is called bhakti-yoga, or pure devotion to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Performance of bhakti-
yoga does not require money, nor does it require us to
expend much energy, but by practicing it we attain
everlasting happiness. Just over five hundred years ago,
the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa descended to this world in the
form of His own devotee, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and He
demonstrated the process of performing pure devotion to
God. By that process one realizes his own self as an
eternal servant of God, and as His part and parcel. He
experiences love and affection for all living beings,
knowing they are part and parcel of the same God, and he
naturally attains true inner happiness.

In this world it is absurd to think that one can have
love and affection for all living entities. If you show
affection or get too close to a ferocious tiger it will
attack you, and a poisonous snake may bite you. If you
really want to love all beings, first love the Supreme
Lord. That love will automatically be distributed to all
beings and in this way everyone can be happy. This is
true love and affection. In that realm of love even
tigers and bears can be calmed and quieted. Great sages
of the past who resided in dense forests were never
attacked by tigers or other wild beasts. If we can
attain that love for the Supreme, we can truly love all
others.




The Nature of the Supreme Self


[In order to be attracted to love that Supreme Being, we
first need to know who He is, what His nature is, and
what His attractive qualities are.]

One who can create entire universes cannot be formless
or without attributes. He must have all varieties of
power and opulence. All the forms we see in this world
have come from Him, so how can He Himself be formless?
The Bible says that God has created man in His own
image, and this is also confirmed in the Vedas.

He is ever-existing, and in the Vedas He is called
Brahman (which refers to the impersonal effulgence of
His body), Paramātmā (His partial manifestation as the
Supersoul in the heart of all beings) and Bhagavān (the

                           9
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017

Supreme Personality of Godhead, who embodies all
opulence, sweetness, and powers). Of these three, only
Bhagavān is complete. Brahman and Paramātmā are His
partial expansions. Everything is present in Bhagavān.

He is so large that complete universes are contained
within Him. Simultaneously, He is so minute that He
resides in each and every atom – in every atom of air,
in every atom of fire and in every atom of water. He is
everywhere and He can hear everything.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one without a
second. He is the same God for the Christians, for the
Muslims, for the Hindus and for all others. There are
not different Gods. He is the same God, the same Allah,
the same Christ. Just as there is one sun and one moon
for the entire world, there is one God for all people.
How can there be more than one God? There is only one
God, but He appears differently according to individual
vision.

For fifteen days the moon appears to gradually increase
in size until it becomes full. Its size then begins to
decrease until it becomes a new moon on the last day of
the lunar month. In this way it appears that there are
fifteen different moons. These “moons” are not different
from each other; only their names and appearances
differ: full moon, new moon, quarter moon and so on.
Similarly, there is only one God, but people have, in
ignorance, separated themselves from each other and from
Him, due to their different languages and conceptions of
Him.

All forms and incarnations of God are His manifestations
and are non-different from Him. Some, being more
complete, are more powerful; and some are less powerful
– just as the full moon is always the same moon,
perceived as full, new, quarter, etc. In reality the
moon is always full, but we see it to be waxing or
waning. In the same way Lord Kṛṣṇa is one without a
second, and He has innumerable manifestations who are
all non-different from Him. He sometimes manifests in
this world personally, and sometimes He sends His
associates here to disseminate pure knowledge. In this
world all souls are His eternal servants, but we have
forgotten Him since the beginning of creation. He
sometimes descends, therefore, and performs very sweet
and powerful pastimes to attract us and engage us in His
service.

No one doubts the existence of the sun, so why should
one doubt the existence of the creator of the sun or
thousands of suns? That personality can create millions
upon millions of worlds in a moment, and He can also
destroy them. He comes to this world only to save us
from suffering, by establishing a relationship with us
and by engaging us in His loving service. There is no
other way to become happy in this or any other world.
There is only one God, and ignorance of our eternal,
individual relationship with Him is the only cause of
our unhappiness.

We need not fear serving Him, thinking it to be like
serving someone of this world where the master gains and

                           10
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017

the servant only experiences the trouble of his labour.
It is not like that in the realm of spiritual love. One
receives great happiness in serving Him, a very
relishable love and affection that is even more than one
receives by serving one’s wife, husband, children,
father and so on. There are oceans of love and affection
in Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental realm. Have very firm faith in
this. Do not doubt that we are spirit souls, parts and
parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and that
we are His eternal servants.




The Process of Self-Realization


In the previous age of Satya-yuga, the Age of Goodness,
mankind lived pious, peaceful and pure lives of
thousands of years. At that time, great sages used to
see Him by meditating upon Him. In this present age it
is not possible to meditate so deeply, because our minds
are unsteady. Such meditation can be achieved, however,
by chanting His name, and by this process we can realize
His mercy and actually see Him. The Vedic literatures
recommend that to attain pure love of God in this
current age, one chant: “Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare. Hare Rāma Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma Hare
Hare.”

In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only process to
achieve God-realization and self-realization is to chant
the holy names of the Lord, and this is easy to do.
These names may be chanted by anyone of any language –
whether one is English, Malaysian, Indian, Spanish or
Chinese. People of all faiths call out to that one God,
who is very beautiful, charming, powerful and merciful.
He can come and play with you in any relationship – as a
master, friend, son or beloved.

For the chanting of these names to be truly effective,
however, they should be chanted according to an
authentic process, given by the Supreme Lord Himself.
Otherwise, such chanting will not produce the desired
result. Knowledge of this transcendental process and its
goal has descended through a line of disciplic
succession of pure spiritual masters, beginning from the
Supreme Lord Himself. Those who have heard directly from
Him appear in that succession of perfect masters, and a
disciple of such a spiritual master can chant
successfully.




The Bona Fide Guide


The bona fide spiritual master, or guru, tells us, “Give
me your ears. I do not want all of your senses – only
your ears.” Among all the senses, only the ears can hear
sound vibration, and thus transcendental words. The guru

                           11
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017

coming in disciplic succession helps us surrender to God
by engaging our function of hearing. Through this
vibration of sound, his transcendental words enter the
heart of the disciple and reveal Kṛṣṇa, God Himself, who
is hidden in everyone’s heart. No sense but the ears can
perceive this transcendental sound.

There are two kinds of sound vibration. One is
transcendental and is beyond this material world (sabda-
brahma). It comes from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Himself via the disciplic succession. The other
is ordinary material sound vibration, which comes from
the vibration of the material tongue. One who has not
extensively practiced bhakti-yoga and who is not perfect
may give Kṛṣṇa’s holy name and various mantras to
others, but the sound vibrations spoken by him will have
no spiritual effect. Although such sounds are by nature
powerful and transcendental, they must be imbued with
realization. Otherwise, they will manifest as worldly,
mundane words. If a guru is not sufficiently expert in
chanting transcendental sound and has no realization of
its nature, that sound vibration will not produce any
real fruit in the heart of the person who receives it
from him. Only self-realized souls perfectly utter
sabda-brahma, or transcendental sound, and one should
receive it from them.

The definition of bhakti, pure devotion, is given in the
Vedic scriptures as follows: “Pure devotional service is
the cultivation of activities that are meant exclusively
for the pleasure of Lord Kṛṣṇa, or in other words, the
uninterrupted flow of service to Kṛṣṇa, performed
through all endeavors of the body, mind and speech, and
through the expression of various spiritual sentiments.
This pure bhakti is not covered by knowledge aimed at
impersonal liberation or by reward-seeking activity, and
it is devoid of all desires other than the aspiration to
bring happiness to Kṛṣṇa.” (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
1.1.11)

The same Vedic scriptures contain many verses that
explain the quality of a person who, because of his own
pure devotional service, can actually help us. One such
verse is as follows: “Any person who seriously desires
real happiness must seek a bona fide spiritual master
and take shelter of him by initiation. The symptom of
the bona fide guru is that, having left aside all
material desires, he has realized the conclusions of the
scriptures by deliberation and is able to convince
others of the Supreme Godhead.. He is renounced from the
materal world.” (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.97)

The following history illustrates how the heinous
criminal Vālmīki became a great devotee by associating
with a self-realized spiritual master who had the above-
mentioned qualities. Vālmīki, though born into the
priestly (brahmana) caste, associated with bad men. As a
result he became a ferocious dacoit, even murdering many
sages. He once approached the exalted sage Nārada Muni
to kill him, but as he moved toward him Nārada raised
his hand and said, “Stop!” The astonished Vālmīki was
forced to freeze his movements and thus a mood of
submission to Nārada entered his heart. Nārada then
revealed to him the reactions that would come to him as

                           12
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt           5/5/2017

a result of his abominable sins. Vālmīki took shelter of
Nārada and inquired from him how to become free from
those reactions.

Nārada said, “Sit down here and chant ‘Rāma Rāma Rāma
Rāma Rāma.’ (Rāma is the name of one of Kṛṣṇa’s
incarnations.) Do this and nothing else.” Vālmīki tried,
but the reactions to his sinful activities had
fructified to the point that he was unable to chant that
divine name of Rāma. Nārada cleverly told him, “If you
cannot pronounce Rāma, you can chant māra.”

Marā (which in the Sanskrit language means “die”) has
the same syllables as Rāma said backwards. When māra
māra is chanted repeatedly, it automatically becomes
“Rāma Rāma.” Having given Vālmīki these instructions,
Nārada left that place.

Vālmīki was easily able to chant māra māra, and
continued chanting for thousands of years while waiting
for his guru’s return. During that time he did not eat
or even pass stool and urine. Termites ate his flesh,
blood and other bodily substances, gradually enclosing
him in a valmik, which means ‘termite-hill’ (similar`to
an ant hill). In this way, nothing but a skeleton
remained of his own body, although it appeared that he
had a body and it was covered with earth. In due course
of time, Brahmā, the chief demigod and original guru of
the disciplic succession of gurus, came to that place.
Upon seeing the condition of Vālmīki’s body, Lord Brahmā
sprinkled water upon him from his sacred water pot while
uttering mantras, and Vālmīki’s body then became that of
a beautiful youth. Brahmā told him, “Now you have
perfected the chanting of your mantra; you have realized
the Supreme Lord.”

[Later on, in the course of his meditation (samadhi),
the great sage Vālmīki composed the famous Rāmāyaṇa, the
authorized history of Lord Rāma, whose name he was
chanting. Written hundreds of thousands of years ago,
the Rāmāyaṇa is considered to be one of the main Vedic
scriptures as well as one of the first spiritual episc
in India. Vālmīki compiled it in the first days of Lord
Rāma’s descent to this world. -ed]

In this day and age it is not possible for us to perform
such austerity. We find it difficult to refrain from
eating, drinking or sleeping for just one day, what to
speak of several years, and we cannot be fully absorbed
in meditation for twelve hours, six hours or even one
hour. But there is a process that we can easily follow,
and this process is the essence of all Vedic scriptures.
Take the seed of the perfect transcendental name of
Kṛṣṇa by accepting initiation from a bona fide guru.
Chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra and you will very easily
find happiness.



Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa

KṛṣṇaKṛṣṇa Hare Hare

Hare Rāma Hare Rāma

                           13
Secrets_of_the_Undiscovered_Self.txt         5/5/2017


RāmaRāma Hare Hare



Table of Contents

We Are Part and Parcel of the Supreme Self

Dedication

Preface

We Are Pure Spirit Souls

We Are Not These Bodies

A King in Illusion

We Are Part and Parcel of the Supreme Self

The Nature of the Supreme Self

The Process of Self-Realization

The Bona Fide Guide




                           14
