Siva-tattva.txt                                 5/5/2017

śiva-tattva



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:    ★★★★★

Tags: śiva-tattva Mahādeva gopeśvara

śiva-tattva Mahādeva gopeśvarattt



* * *




* * *




śiva-tattva



contents

Preface

Chapter 1 Lord Śiva's Highest Benediction

Chapter 2 The Post and The Person

Chapter 3 Three Considerations

Chapter 4 Gatekeeper to the Abode of Love




Preface




Lord Śiva is manifest from the Supreme Lord’s own divine
desire. An understanding of śiva-tattva (the principle
of śiva) is therefore essential in realizing the deep
purpose behind human life and its relationships. Lord
Śiva is a personality of many forms and names, such as
Śaṅkara, Śambhu and Maheśa. He is situated eternally in
his original form as Gopīśvara, and in that form he
guards the doorway to that which matters most — our
transcendental life. By his own selfless dedication,

                           1
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

this gentle and mysterious figure patiently guides those
who traverse the path to the Absolute, assuring them
safe passage through all the stages of devotion.

In the book Śiva-Tattva, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja brilliantly clarifies the holy Hindu trinity:
Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva. Empowered by his spiritual
masters in the disciplic succession of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava tradition, he reveals the conclusive truth
(tattva) of Lord Śiva’s original position and gives us a
look at his endearing and affectionate nature.

The many intriguing historical narrations herein, all
from authoritative Vedic literatures, are interwoven
with conclusive philosophy. In this way, Śiva-Tattva
reveals the beautiful harmony in Lord Śiva’s apparently
contradictory qualities. He is the destroyer and
simultaneously the ingredient cause of creation. He is
the predominating deity of the mode of ignorance and
simutaneously the reservoir of absolute knowledge. He is
the clever cheater and at the same time the giver of
mercy. His associates are ghosts, hobgoblins and
witches, and at the same time he associates with the
most exalted demigods and sages, and even God Himself.

The profound topic of śiva-tattva is so vast that this
work could have included entire chapters on each of Lord
Śiva’s glories, pastimes, and manifestations. The
intention of this edition, however, is to inspire the
reader with its essence, and to awaken interest in the
evolution of consciousness.

Śiva-Tattva opens with the history of a special mission,
originally told in Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s epic, Śrī
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. The aim of this mission was to
establish in the world the ultimate goal of all yogic
practices, prema-bhakti. In a heart-to-heart
conversation with the sage Nārada Muni, Lord Śiva brings
to light the qualifications of a genuine Vaiṣṇava or
devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Setting
the scene for this divine conversation, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī writes:

In his own abode, Lord Śiva was just completing his
worship of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa and, absorbed in ecstatic
love, he began dancing and performing kīrtana. His
followers, headed by Sri Nandiśvara, were lovingly
praising him by singing, playing musical instruments and
calling out, “Jaya! Jaya! All glories to you! All
glories to you!” With her lotus hands, Pārvatī-devi was
creating an enchanting rhythm with karatālas, and Lord
Śiva was praising her for that. Seeing all this from a
distance, the sage Nārada jubilantly offered obeisances
and began playing his vina. Time and again he said, “You
are the greatest recipient of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy.”
Repeating Lord Brahmā’s words, he began glorifying Śiva
in a melodious voice. When Śrī Nārada approached Śrī
Rudra (Lord Śiva) to take the dust from his lotus feet,
Śiva, who was intoxicated in the nectar-stream of kṛṣṇa-
prema and who is very dear to the Vaiṣṇavas, pulled the
sage near, embraced him, and respectfully said, ‘Oh, son
of Brahmā! What are you saying?!’ (Śrī Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta Chapter Three, verses 1-5)


                           2
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

Lord Śiva’s fame as the greatest devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa
was first presented to the English-speaking world by His
Divine Grace Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda.
The foremost world-wide teacher of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism,
Śrīla Prabhupāda inspired an international movement. He
gave to the world a veritable treasure-chest in his
English translations of Vedic literature. It is that
treasure-chest upon which we continually drew, to enrich
this publication with footnotes and supplements. It was
on the request of Śrīla Prabhupāda that Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja now travels and teaches audiences world-wide,
nurturing the spiritual lives of thousands.

Śiva Tattva is a compilation of four transcribed
lectures of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja which, although not
spoken in a series, takes the reader on a marvelous
journey. Chapters one and two were spoken during his
1997 World Tour in Holland, on the morning and evening
of July 3rd. Chapter three came from the English
translation of his Hindi lecture, given in Mathurā,
India on the eve of Śiva-Ratri, March 5, 2000. Finally,
in the fourth chapter, in a discourse spoken on October
10, 2001, he takes us on a pilgrimage to a temple in the
ancient city of Jagannātha Purī, where Lord Śiva resides
as Lokanātha Mahādeva.

The chronicles and personalities discussed in this book
do not belong to the realm of religion or mythology;
rather, they encompass universal truth. Usage of
Sanskrit, the language in which the Vedic science was
originally told, has been kept to a minimum for easy
reading. The occasional word used, such as bhakti,
meaning devotion, is clearly explained in the text.
Following the tradition of our spiritual preceptors, we
use standard diacritical markings to indicate the
pronunciation of Sanskrit words. Pronounce ā like a in
father, ī like ea in neat, ū like oo in root, ṛ like ri
in rip, ṁ and ṅ like ng in hung, ś and ṣ like sh in shy,
and c like ch in chap.

Begging for the mercy of Sri Harī, Guru and Vaiṣṇava, we
humbly present Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s glorifications
of that most unconventional of transcendental
personalities, Lord Śiva. We also beg the reader’s
forgiveness for any mistakes or shortcomings in our
delivery of his offering to Lord Śiva, on the auspicious
occasion of Śiva-Ratri — March, 2005.

The Editors




Chapter 1

Lord Śiva's Highest Benediction


Once, the great sage Nārada Muni traveled to the abode
of Lord Śiva and began to glorify him, saying, “You are
very near and dear to the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa. Not only
that, you are Kṛṣṇa’s manifestation; you are non-
different from Him. You can give liberation and also

                           3
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-prema, the rare jewel of transcendental love for
Kṛṣṇa.”

Hearing Nārada glorify him in numerous ways, Lord Śiva
became angry and said, “Your glorification of me is
false. I am not at all dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Lord Śiva is actually most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
therefore Kṛṣṇa can give him services which He cannot
give anyone else. When the demigods and demons were
churning the Milk Ocean in order to obtain the nectar of
immortality, the first substance produced was a powerful
and dangerous poison, burning the entire world. The
demigods appealed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and He advised them to
request Lord Śiva to drink the poison. Thus, they
worshiped Lord Śiva and prayed, “Please save us! Only
you can protect us!” Lord Śiva collected the poison and
took it in his mouth, but he hesitated to swallow it,
considering, “Lord Kṛṣṇa is in my heart. The poison will
affect Him.” He therefore kept the poison in his throat,
which was burned, and his neck turned the color blue.

Now, out of genuine humility, Lord Śiva told Narada: “I
want to be His beloved devotee, but actually I am not.
You know that I always wear ashes from the burial
grounds, and a garland of skulls. All my associates are
ghosts and witches, so I am not qualified to be Kṛṣṇa’s
dear devotee. If I am so dear to Him, why would He have
ordered me to engage with the mode of ignorance in the
terrible function of destroying of the universe? If I am
such a great recipient of His mercy, why would he have
ordered me to become Śaṅkarācārya and preach a
philosophy that is adverse to Him?”

Actually, although he expressed otherwise, it was
because Śiva is so dear to Kṛṣṇa that Kṛṣṇa was able to
give him the difficult task of appearing as
Śaṅkarācārya.1 Many people had been worshiping the
Supreme Lord only to fulfill their selfish purposes,
thinking, “Simply by our worship of God, He will be
pleased with us and satisfy all our worldly desires.”
They worshiped Him only so that He would rapidly arrange
for all of their needs, not to please Him. Lord Kṛṣṇa
thought, “This is very dangerous.” He called Lord Śiva
and instructed him, “Such false devotees will create
great disturbances, so keep them far away from Me.
Create a philosophy which teaches, ‘brahma satyaṁ jagan
mithyā — the Absolute is true, this world is false.’ You
should preach, ‘All souls are Śiva; all souls are
Brahmā; all are one. You are brahma, the impersonal
Absolute. There is no need to worship any other God; you
are the Supreme God.’ “ Reluctant, Lord Śiva asked
Kṛṣṇa, “Can you please tell someone else to do this? I
am not qualified for this service.” Kṛṣṇa replied, “No,
you will have to do this. In the entire world, I see no
one else who is as capable.”

Feeling ashamed, Lord Śiva now told Nārada, “At last, I
had to agree to follow His order. Appearing as
Śaṅkarācārya I preached everywhere, ‘You are brahma, you
are brahma, you are the impersonal brahma. The entire
world is false.’ I am so much regretting this. I know I
have committed a great offence by causing so many people
to be averse to Lord Kṛṣṇa. Still, to carry out His

                           4
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

order I spread this doctrine. It is clear by the fact
that He sometimes gives me such orders that I am not His
dearest one.”



Cheating the Cheaters



Lord Śiva also expressed to Nārada his regret in having
given benedictions to Lord Kṛṣṇa’s enemies. To fulfill
his Lord’s desires, he had given benedictions to demons
like Rāvaṇa, Vṛkāsura, Śālva and Jayadratha, and thus he
had performed many activities that were seemingly
opposed to Kṛṣṇa and kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

Nārada Muni said, “Master, please don’t try to mislead
me. I know that whatever you do is to please Lord Kṛṣṇa
and to assist Him in His pastimes, for the benefit of
all beings. You told me that you have many times given
benedictions to His enemies. I know that His enemies, as
well as the enemies of His devoted cousins, the
Pāṇḍavas, worship you for ill-motivated benedictions. I
also know that you grant them benedictions. But those
benedictions are not foolproof; they always have some
loophole. Actually, you cheat these beneficiaries in
order to please Lord Kṛṣṇa. You are undoubtedly His
dearest friend.”

Śiva and Nārada continued to discuss some historical
incidents which, according to Śiva, proved that he was
not dear to Kṛṣṇa — but according to Nārada, proved the
opposite.



A Loophole

The great epic Mahābhārata tells of King Jayadratha, one
of the many demons who received such a clever
benediction from Lord Śiva. Duryodhana, the paternal
cousin of the five Pāṇḍava brothers, had given his
sister Dushala in marriage to King Jayadratha, and
therefore the king had also become like a brother-in-law
of the Pāṇḍavas. Once, Jayadratha tried to kidnap the
Pāṇḍavas’ wife, Draupadī, desiring strongly to make her
his own wife. As he forced her onto his chariot, she
admonished him, crying, “I am the wife of the Pāṇḍavas.
When they catch you, they will punish you and kill you!”

Jayadratha’s arrogance prevented him from hearing her,
and he continued his abduction. Meanwhile, the sage
Nārada approached the Pāṇḍavas and informed them, “Oh, I
saw Jayadratha taking away Draupadī, and she was
weeping!”

Two of the Pāṇḍavas, Bhīma and Arjuna, immediately
chased after Jayadratha. Bhīma dismounted his chariot
and ran faster than Jayadratha’s horses. With his bow
and arrows, Arjuna created a fire that surrounded the
chariot of Jayadratha, who was then captured and could
not move. Severely beaten by Bhīma and arrested by
Arjuna, Jayadratha was bound to the chariot and taken to

                           5
Siva-tattva.txt                                 5/5/2017

where Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja had been staying with
Draupadī.

Bhīma and Arjuna spoke to Yudhiṣṭhira, their respected
senior brother. Bhīma urged him, “I want to kill
Jayadratha. Please order me to kill him.”

In support of Bhīma, Arjuna said, “Jayadratha has
performed a heinous act and should be killed.”

King Yudhiṣṭhira replied, “The offense was committed
against Draupadī. We should take the case to her, and we
will do whatever she orders.”

When Jayadratha was brought at the feet of Draupadī, she
mercifully told her husbands, “Don’t kill him; forgive
him. He is our brother-in-law. If you kill him, your
cousin-sister will be widowed and she will weep for the
rest of her life.”

Bhīma and Arjuna then approached Lord Kṛṣṇa and appealed
to Him: “What should we do? We have vowed to kill
Jayadratha, and now Draupadī tells us to forgive him.”

Kṛṣṇa replied, “For one who has been honored, dishonor
is worse than death.”

Arjuna then shaved King Jayadratha’s head, leaving five
patches of hair, and he shaved one side of his face,
leaving the other side unshaven. Jayadratha felt
humiliated, and after being released by Bhīma and Arjuna
he considered it better to have died. He thought, “I
will somehow take revenge.” Thus absorbed, he went to
Gangotrī in the Himālayas and undertook a severe type of
penance to please Lord Śiva.

After some months he gave up all food, water, and bodily
activities, and was about to die. At this point Lord
Śiva came before him and asked what boon he wanted as a
result of his austerity. Jayadratha replied, “I want
revenge against the Pāṇḍavas. I want to defeat and kill
all of them.” Lord Śiva told him, “You can defeat the
Pāṇḍavas, but only Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma, Nakula and
Sahadeva; not Arjuna.” Jayadratha said, “If you cannot
benedict me to my full satisfaction, then please grant
that neither Arjuna nor anyone else will be able to kill
me.” Lord Śiva replied, “I can grant you this: if your
head is severed and falls on the ground, the person who
caused this will die immediately. Your life will be
saved and your head will rejoin your body. You may be
‘killed’ hundreds of thousands of times, but you will
not die. On the other hand, if your severed head falls
into your father’s hands and he throws it on the ground,
then you will die.” Jayadratha was satisfied, thinking,
“My father would never do this.”

When the battle of Kurukṣetra began, Jayadratha took the
side of the Pāṇḍavas’ enemy, Duryodhana. One evening
during the battle, as the sun was setting, Jayadratha’s
father was absorbed in prayer and making an offering of
water to the Sun-god. Arjuna saw this opportune moment.
With the skillful release of an arrow, he severed
Jayadratha’s head from his body and caused it to fall
into the hands of his meditating father. Startled and

                           6
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

without thought, Jayadratha’s father tossed the head on
the ground. Then, opening his eyes he exclaimed, “What
was that wet thing?” Seeing that he had just thrown his
son’s head, he began to cry, “Oh my son! Oh my son! You
are dead now!”



A Clever Benediction

Envious of Kṛṣṇa and with a desire for the strength to
destroy him, the demon Śālva also took shelter of Lord
Śiva. He performed a severe type of austerity and ate no
more than a handful of ashes daily. After one year, Lord
Śiva became pleased with him and asked him to beg for a
boon.

Śālva begged from Lord Śiva the gift of an airplane,
saying, “This airplane should perform as I wish; it
should be operated by my mind. On my order it should go
to heaven or anywhere I desire. In summer it should be
air-conditioned. If there are only two men, there should
only be two seats, and if I want to travel with hundreds
of thousands of persons, many seats should manifest. It
should never crash due to mechanical difficulty, and it
should be equipped with all varieties of weapons. It
should be dangerous and fearful to the Yadus.”

Lord Śiva agreed, and Śālva was helped by the demon Maya
Dānava to manufacture a mystical airplane that began to
destroy Dvārakā, Lord Kṛṣṇa’s abode. Śālva personally
attacked from above, and his soldiers attacked on the
ground. Headed by Pradyumna, the Yadu dynasty warriors
fought with Śālva and his army, but they could not
defeat him.

Finally, Lord Kṛṣṇa personally appeared on the
battlefield, and after much intense fighting on both
sides and many mystic displays by Śālva, the Lord took
up His disc, cut off the demon’s head, and gave him
liberation.

In this way, the benedictions given by Lord Śiva to the
enemies of Lord Kṛṣṇa always have a weak point — a
loophole. Lord Śiva is extremely clever, and he is
always serving his Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Nārada knew this
fact, and he wanted to publicize Lord Śiva’s glories.
Śiva is very near and dear to Kṛṣṇa, and non-different
from Him. Try to always honor him, for he is Kṛṣṇa’s
greatest devotee.



nimna-gānāṁ yathā gaṅgā

devānām acyuto yathā

vaiṣṇavānāṁ yathā śambhuḥ

purāṇānām idam tathā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.13.16)

Just as the Gaṅgā is the greatest of all rivers, Lord

                            7
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

Acyuta [Kṛṣṇa] the supreme among deities and Lord Śambhu
[Śiva] the greatest of Vaiṣṇavas, so Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
is the greatest of all Purāṇas.



The Principle of Śiva

The principle of Śiva — śiva-tattva — is extremely
complex. The principle of Brahmā is not as complicated,
because Lord Brahmā is always a jīva, a finite spirit
soul. Sometimes, when there is no qualified jīva, Lord
Viṣṇu (Kṛṣṇa’s expansion) personally takes the post of
Brahmā, but that is rare. Lord Śiva is not like that; he
is not a finite soul.

After passing through the eight material coverings, and
after crossing the Virajā (the river that divides the
material world and the spiritual world) and the planet
of Lord Brahmā (the highest material planet), one comes
to the planet of Śiva. There he is known as Sadāśiva, a
manifestation of Lord Viṣṇu.

Śiva-tattva can be understood by the analogy of yogurt
and milk. Yogurt is nothing but a transformation of
milk. Milk can become yogurt, but yogurt cannot become
milk. This analogy is found in Śrī Brahma-Saṁhitā and
elucidated in Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s commentary: “Just as
milk is transformed into yogurt by contact with a
transforming agent, Śrī Govinda, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
similarly accepts the form of Śambhu (Śiva) in order to
accomplish a specific purpose. The example of yogurt is
actually given in order to convey the idea of cause and
effect, not the idea of transformation. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
reality and cannot be transformed, so it is not possible
for Him to undergo any kind of distortion. A wish-
fulfilling gem manifests many things according to one’s
desire, yet its constitutional nature remains
untransformed.”2



Rāmeśvara Mahādeva

When Śrī Rāmacandra was making the bridge to Laṅkā, he
established a Śiva-liṅga (deity form of Śiva) called
Rāmeśvara. All the common people began glorifying Lord
Śiva, shouting, “Rāmeśvara ki jaya! You are Rāma’s
iśvara: you are the lord of Rāma.” The demigods were
unsatisfied by this and announced through an arial
voice, “Rāmas ca asau īśvaraḥ: Rāma is God, and Śaṅkarā
is also God; they are the same.” Hearing this, the Śiva-
liṅga broke. Lord Śiva emerged from the liṅga and told
them all, “You are all foolish; you do not know my
tattva, the established truths regarding my identity.
Rāma is my beloved and my God, and that is why I am
called Rāmeśvara.”



Granting Perfect Love




                           8
Siva-tattva.txt                                  5/5/2017

Lord Śiva eternally resides in Lord Kṛṣṇa’s abode,
Vṛndāvana, where he manifests many forms to render
devotional services to Him. The form of Gopīśvara
Mahādeva3 was manifested by Lord Kṛṣṇa’s desire. When
Kṛṣṇa desired to perform His rāsa dance, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, the embodiment of His pleasure potency,
manifested from His left side and Gopīśvara Mahādeva
manifested from His right side. The form of Śiva who
lives in Kāśī or Kailāsa in the material world is a
partial manifestation of the original Sadāśiva in
Vṛndāvana. The many other commonly worshiped forms of
Lord Śiva are expansions of Sadāśiva. They are not the
original. Partial expansions such as Pīppaleśvara
Mahādeva, Bhūteśvara Mahādeva, Raṅgeśvara Mahādeva and
so on cannot award the benediction that can be attained
by the mercy of Gopīśvara — the highest perfection of
love, namely vraja-prema.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has composed a prayer in
his Vraja-vilāsa-stava:

mudā gopendrasyatmaja bhuja parisranga nīdhaye

sphurad gopirvrndair yam iha bhāgavatam pranayibhih

bhajadbhistair bhaktyās vamabhilasitam prāptam acirād

yamitire gopīśvaram anudinam taṁ kila bhaje

I daily worship Gopīśvara Mahādeva, who is situated on
the bank of Yamunā. That very Gopīśvara was worshipped
with deep devotion by the gopīs, and he quickly
fulfilled their desire to attain a supremely precious
jewel in the form of the embrace of the son of Nanda
Mahārāja [Kṛṣṇa].



Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, the great Vaiṣṇava saint who
resided in Vṛndāvana near the old Śrī Madana-Mohana
temple, would go daily to see Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva at
his temple. Once, in his older years, Sanātana Gosvāmī
had a dream wherein Gopīśvara Mahādeva appeared and
instructed him: “Now that you are old, please do not go
through so much trouble to see me.” Sanātana Gosvāmī
replied, “I will continue to come. I cannot change this
habit.” Gopīśvara Mahādeva said, “Then I will come and
stay very near to your residence, manifesting in
Bankhandī.” The very next day, Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva
appeared in Bankhandī, halfway between his orginal
temple and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s residence. Seeing
this, Sanātana Gosvāmī became overwhelmed with
transcendental ecstasy, and from that day on he visited
Bankhandī Mahādeva every day.

Wherever he was, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī could not live
without his beloved Lord Śiva — Gopīśvara Mahādeva and
Bankhandī Mahādeva in Vṛndāvana, and Kāmeśvara Mahādeva
in Kāmyavana forest. In Govardhana he would stay near
his very dear friend, Cakreśvara Mahādeva, who acquired
the name when he served Govardhana Hill and the
Vrajavāsīs by holding up his trident like a cakra,
protecting them from the torrential deluge sent by King
Indra.

                           9
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017


Prior to this, Lord Śiva had asked Śrī Kṛṣṇa for the
boon to witness His childhood pastimes. Kṛṣṇa ordered
him to situate himself in Nandagaon in the form of a
hill. Śiva followed this order and became Nandīśvara
Hill, and he thus became known as Nandīśvara. (Lord
Brahmā became Brahma-parvata, the mountain in Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s birthplace, Varṣāṇā. Because Brahmā is so near
to Rādhikā, he is also our Gurudeva.)

We honor Lord Śiva as a great Vaiṣṇava and as Guru. We
do not worship him separately. We observe Śiva-ratri,
Lord Śiva’s appearance day, and we glorify him in
connection to his relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī has written in his Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
that all Vaiṣṇavas should observe Śiva-caturdaśī (Śiva-
ratri). Lord Śiva, in whom all good qualities reside,
should certainly be honored by the observance of this
day.

We offer obeisance to Lord Śiva with prayers like this:



vṛndāvanāvani-pate! jaya soma soma-maule

sanaka-sanandana-sanātana-nāradeḍya

gopīśvara! vraja-vilāsi-yugāṅghri-padme

prema prayaccha nirupādhi namo namas te

(Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma 103)



O Gatekeeper of Vṛndāvana! O Soma, all glories to you! O
you whose forehead is decorated with the moon, and who
is worshipable by the sages headed by Sanaka, Sanandana,
Sanātana and Nārada! O Gopīśvara! Desiring that you
bestow upon me prema for the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Mādhava, who perform joyous pastimes in Vraja-
dhāma, I offer obeisances unto you time and again.



By Śiva’s Benediction

A brāhmaṇa in Kāśī Vārāṇasī once prayed to Lord Śiva, “I
want to give my daughter in marriage, but I have no
money. Please give me money.” Lord Śiva told him, “Go to
Vṛndāvana and meet with Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī. You can
ask him to give you some wealth for your daughter’s
marriage.” The brāhmaṇa went to Vṛndāvana, by foot, and
there he asked the villagers there for the whereabouts
of a person named Sanātana Gosvāmī. As they all knew
him, they pointed out his residence.

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī was practicing bhajana near the
Yamunā River at Kāliya-hrada, the former abode of the
very poisonous snake named Kāliya. Kāliya-hrada was
close to the Yamunā, and therefore its surrounding area
was full of sand. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī wore only a
loincloth. He used to go begging door-to-door for a

                            10
Siva-tattva.txt                                 5/5/2017

small amount of prasāda (Kṛṣṇa’s food remnants), and
would take as his meal only one dry chapatti (flat
bread), with no salt.

The brāhmaṇa arrived at his cottage and told him, “I
went to Śaṅkara Mahādeva, Lord Śiva, and he told me to
meet you. He said you will give me some wealth for my
daughter’s marriage.” Sanātana Gosvāmī replied, “I have
no possessions. You can see that I have nothing but a
loincloth.” Then he thought, “Oh, Śiva cannot tell a
lie. He is my bosom friend.” Thinking of Lord Siva and
contemplating further, he remembered a touchstone he had
once disgarded and then forgotten. Now he told the
brāhmaṇa, “Go to the Yamunā and remove some of the sand,
and there you will find a touchstone. It is somewhere in
the sand, though I don’t remember where.”

The brāhmaṇa found the jewel, touched it to iron, and
the iron turned into gold. He was very, very happy that
Lord Śiva had told him to come to Vṛndāvana, and thought
with gratitude, “My prayer has been answered by him.” On
the way home, however, his greed for money increased and
he began thinking, “Why did Sanātana Gosvāmī keep the
touchstone in the sand? It had no use there. He must
have still more valuable jewels.”

He thus returned, and Sanātana Gosvāmī asked him, “Why
have you come back?” He replied, “I’ve come because I
know that you have more valuable jewels than this.”
Sanātana Gosvāmī then said, “Go and throw the touchstone
in the Yamunā. The brāhmaṇa did so with all his power,
and then Sanātana Gosvāmī told him, “Come here. Come
here.” He gave him the mantra, “Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma
Hare Hare” and said, “I do not have worldly jewels, but
I have transcendental jewels. The jewel of Lord Kṛṣṇa
and Śrī Rādhā will come to you in a very short time. So
remain here. Your daughter’s marriage will take place
automatically. Stay here and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa.” That
brāhmaṇa followed his instruction and became a very
elevated saint.




Chapter 2

The Post and The Person


Śrī Nārada desired to proclaim the glories of Lord Śiva.
As previously described, he praised Śiva as the greatest
devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa and most dear to Him, and Lord
Śiva became upset by hearing those praises. Śiva then
related a number of incidents which, according to him,
were evidence that he was not dear to Kṛṣṇa at all.

Now Lord Śiva compares himself to Śrī Prahlāda
Mahārāja,4 the famed devotee of Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva
described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He told Nārada, “Śrī
Prahlāda Mahārāja is superior to me, and it is he who is
the dear devotee of the Lord.” Even though Lord Śiva is
superior to Prahlāda Mahārāja, he told Nārada that

                           11
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

Prahlāda Mahārāja is superior. Why? He said this to
encourage people to follow Prahlāda Mahārāja’s ideal
character and teachings.

However, Prahlāda Mahārāja cannot enter Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
transcendental abode, Vṛndāvana, whereas Lord Śiva
resides there eternally as Gopīśvara. Śiva serves Śrī
Kṛṣṇa personally in numerous ways. He and his wife
Pārvatī-devī meditate on aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā, Lord Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s confidential eight-fold daily pastimes. These
secret pastimes are very confidential, yet both Śiva and
Pārvatī are able to meditate upon them. Śiva is hundreds
of thousands of times superior to and more worshipable
than Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja, and yet the artful Śiva
declared Prahlāda Mahārāja to be superior. Why did he do
so? In one sense Prahlāda Mahārāja is superior, and in
another sense he is not.

We can reconcile this by considering the two
perspectives from which to understand the identity of
Lord Śiva: We can see Śiva from the point of view of his
post, and also from the point of view of his
personality. As a personality, separate from his post,
he appears as an associate of the Supreme Lord, such as
Gopīśvara, Hanumān and Bhīma. As Gopīśvara he resides
eternally in Vṛndāvana. As Hanumān he always associates
with and serves Lord Rāma. As Bhīma he always serves
Lord Kṛṣṇa. And, when Hanumān and Bhīma combine together
in this present age of Kali-yuga, they become
Madhvācārya, our Sampradāya-guru.5

From the point of view of Lord Śiva’s function as the
god of annihilation, and also that of Brahmā as the
secondary creator of the universe, Śiva and Brahmā are
actually posts. Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva are not
ordinary human beings, but their posts are like that of
the president or prime minister of a nation, wherein the
man representing the post has to perform a certain
defined job.

Both as the post and the person, Śiva is superior to
Brahmā. Lord Śiva is an expansion of Lord Viṣṇu, but
sometimes a jīva may become Śiva’s expansion known as
Rudra. If a man purely performs the duties of varṇāśrama
for one hundred births, he may become Brahmā.6 In other
words, he may attain the position or post of Brahmā. In
turn, when a person in the post of Brahmā carries out
his function expertly for one hundred births, he becomes
qualified to perform the function of Śiva in his
manifestation as Rudra. Śiva’s post is therefore
superior to that of Brahmā, and this is also evidence
that Śiva is more powerful than Brahmā.

The Duty of Destruction



What is the function of Lord Śiva’s post, and why is it
superior to that of Lord Brahmā? One reason is that
Brahmā cannot execute pralaya, the complete destruction
of the universe — a very dangerous thing, whereas Śiva
can do so.

Śiva’s function as destroyer is similar to that of a

                           12
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

farmer who plants and cultivates a large area of wheat.
The farmer carefully waters and nourishes the crop,
guarding it from animals, and after five or six months
the wheat matures and ripens. Then, either by hand or a
machine, the farmer harvests the plants and carefully
removes the grains from their shafts. The rest of the
plant-matter becomes refuse, subject to rotting and
attracting disease, vermin, and snakes. Therefore, the
farmer sets fire to it and burns it.

Just as the farmer extracts the grains from the plants,
Lord Śiva extracts the eternal spirit souls from their
material bodies and from the world. At the time of
annihilation he creates an inferno, setting the entire
universe on fire, but the spirit souls are not
destroyed.

There are two kinds of universal devastations: one at
the end of Lord Brahmā’s day and one at the end of his
life. At the end of his day (4,320,000,000 solar years)
he rests in a mystic sleep within the body of
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and all the conditioned living
entities enter as well.7

While the entire universe is submerged in water, the
living entities rest in their subtle bodies within the
transcendental body of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. They await
the start of the next day of Brahmā, the next material
creation or manifestation. Some of them become
liberated, and others do not.

When Lord Brahmā completes the one hundred celestial
years of his life, Lord Śiva again performs this duty of
destruction. At that time all the spirit souls enter
into the body of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu or Mahā Viṣṇu. At
the end of each day of Lord Brahmā, all souls enter
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and at the end of Brahmā’s life,
even the millions of manifestations of Garbhodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu enter Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu8 along with the spirit
souls. At the time of creation, Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu
generates innumerable manifestations of Garbhodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu, and at the time of complete annihilation, they
enter back into his body.9

Lord Śiva is not a living entity, but he is also not in
the category of Lord Viṣṇu. He is much more powerful
than any living entity, even up to Lord Brahmā. However,
he is not equal to Lord Viṣṇu. Because he is almost as
good as the Supreme Personalty of Godhead, he can see
the three phases of time: past, present, and future. One
of his eyes is like the sun and another is like the
moon. He also has a third eye, located between his
eyebrows. It is from this third eye that he generates
fire and employs it at the time of the universal
destruction.

Seen from this perspective — the destroyer — Lord Siva
cannot serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa directly, because he is engaged
at his post. Those souls who are liberated after
hundreds of thousands of lifetimes of devotional
practice, having renounced all responsibilities and
concerns of the world — including occupations like that
of Brahmā and Śiva — and who constantly hear about,
glorify, and remember Lord Kṛṣṇa, take birth in this

                           13
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

world as pure devotees like Prahlāda Mahārāja. This was
told by Lord Śiva to Śrī Nārada.

Prahlāda Mahārāja has nothing to do with this world;
nothing to create or demolish. He rejected all such
affairs as insignificant. Although he had inherited a
large kingdom, it was controlled and governed by his
ministers. His senses were totally absorbed in the
transcendental loving service to the Supreme Lord. He
was always engaged in hearing the name and glories of
the Lord, singing and speaking about his glories,
remembering and meditating on him, offering prayers,
carrying out the his orders and fully surrendering to
him.

Devotees in Prahlāda’s category have no need to approach
Lord Kṛṣṇa’s manifestations like Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva and
Lord Rāma, for the Lord personally comes to them in
these forms. Lord Śiva told Śrī Nārada that because he
is always engaged in the post of controlling the
universe, he can neither see nor offer services to the
Lord daily, as Prahlāda Mahārāja sees Lord Vāmanadeva or
Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. Vāmanadeva and Nṛsiṁhadeva are both
manifestations of the same Lord, who regularly gives
Prahlāda his divine association and the opportunity to
serve and offer obeisance at his lotus feet.

Although both Brahmā and Śiva are actually superior in
bhakti to Prahlāda Mahārāja, their posts involve contact
with the three guṇas, or modes of material nature,
namely goodness, passion, and ignorance. The role of
Lord Brahmā is creation and procreation in raja-guṇa,
the mode of passion. Lord Śiva’s role of demolition and
dissolution is in tama-guṇa, the mode of ignorance. It
is for this reason that they are called guṇa-āvatāras,
incarnations of the material qualities.

Prahlāda Mahārāja is nirguṇa, transcendental to the
three modes of nature. He has nothing to do with
activities in material goodness, passion, and ignorance,
by which this world is shackled. Lord Śiva is also
beyond the three modes of nature, but he adopts the mode
of ignorance (tama-guṇa) to efficiently perform his
function.



The Personal Associate



Regarding Lord Śiva’s glorification of Prahlāda
Mahārāja, now consider Lord Śiva’s identity as a
transcendental personality — separate from his post.

Sometimes senior Vaiṣṇavas express sincere recognition
of the novice, inspiring him or her on the path of
devotion. The Vaiṣṇava may say, “Oh, you work so hard
and earn money, and with that money you support and
nourish me. I have no means at all. I do nothing but
visit for a short while, eating, and sleeping at your
expense. I would not be able to speak the glories of
Lord Kṛṣṇa at this festival if you had not arranged for
the management of all the activities here, so you are

                           14
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

superior to me.”

Out of sincere humility, gratitude and affection,
liberated souls speak in this endearing manner, and at
the same time they are fixed in the realization that
they are always being personally maintained by the
Supreme Lord. The senior Vaisnava has the disciple’s
personal benefit in mind.

However, Lord Śiva was not speaking for Prahlāda
Mahārāja’s benefit, but to acquaint aspiring devotees
with the stages of devotion. His desire was to
facilitate the service of Śrī Nārada Muni and Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī10, whose mission was to establish in
the world the sequence of the grades of devotion and
ultimately establish the glories of the gopīs. Try to
understand all these truths, and seek to gradually
become firmly situated in bhakti.

Imagine that you are in a market in which there are
thousands of varieties of shops. In some of those shops
there are products made of iron, in some shops there are
products made of gold, in some there are jewels, and in
others cintāmaṇi (wish-fulfilling stones). An expert is
guiding you through all the shops, pointing out
different products and revealing which are superior.

If there are a thousand pounds of iron and only one
ounce of gold, the gold has more value. On the other
hand, many pounds of gold will not amount to the value
of one Kaustubha-mani or a similarly precious stone.
Millions of such precious jewels cannot compare with a
tiny quantity of cintāmaṇi, and even millions of
cintāmaṇi stones cannot compare with one holy name of
Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Now suppose someone is chanting the name of Lord Kṛṣṇa
alone, and another is absorbed in the name of Rādhā-
Ramaṇa. The name Rādhā-Ramaṇa, meaning Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
enjoyer of pastimes with Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, has more
transcendental taste (rasa) than the name Kṛṣṇa alone.
The person absorbed in that holy name will therefore
experience a greater spiritual pleasure.

Regarding the analogy of the shops in a market, that
expert tells you, “This shop is good, that shop is
better, and this one is the best. Similarly, in his Śrī
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī establishes
the gradations of excellence of various devotees and
their devotion, in order to help his readers determine
their spiritual path.

The history of Nārada Muni’s coming to the abode of Lord
Śiva and glorifying him was first narrated in this Śrī
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. Like Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Nārada
is also that expert described above. He desired to
establish pure bhakti in the world, and therefore he
played the role of searching for the greatest devotee
and recipient of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. His search had
taken him first to the “shop” of a brāhmaṇa in Prayāga,
and after that to South India, to the shop of a king.
Then he traveled to heaven, where he entered the shop of
King Indra, and Indra sent him to the shop of Lord
Brahmā. Brahmā sent him to Lord Śiva, and Lord Śiva is

                           15
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

now sending him to Prahlāda Mahārāja. Gradually, Śrī
Nārada will bring us to the greatest recipients of Lord
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, the gopīs. In the form of Gopīśvara, Lord
Śiva is the beloved servant and associate of those
gopīs.




Chapter 3

Three Considerations


There are three considerations (vicāras) from which to
understand the relationship between Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord
Śiva. One is called tattva-gata-vicāra — the
consideration of their relationship by established
philosophical truth. Another is called aiśvarya-gata-
vicāra — the consideration of their relationship in the
Supreme Lord’s pastimes of majesty, and the third is
naravat-gata-vicāra — the consideration of their
relationship in the Supreme Lord’s sweet, human-like
pastimes.

According to philosophical truth (tattva), Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
plenary portion is Sadāśiva, and Sadāśiva’s partial
manifestation is Lord Śiva. From the perspective of Lord
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in opulence and majesty (aiśvarya),
Lord Kṛṣṇa is Śiva’s worshipful Deity, who is always
loved, honored and respected by him. However, in
naravat-gata-vicāra, Kṛṣṇa plays another role — that of
an ordinary human being. He performs pastimes as a very
young, small child who cannot do anything independently.
His mother, Śrīmatī Yaśodā devī, feeds Him and tends to
all His needs. During these human-like pastimes, Lord
Śiva might come and give Him benedictions. In the
scriptures called the Purāṇas it is stated that when
Kṛṣṇa resided in Dvārakā, He worshiped Śiva to beget a
child from the womb of His wife Jāmbavatī. Although Śiva
is worshiped by Kṛṣṇa in those pastimes, he never thinks
himself superior. He is always conscious that Kṛṣṇa is
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and that he is
Kṛṣṇa’s eternal servant.

It is essential to have a clear understanding of these
truths. One who knows these three perspectives or
considerations can understand the relationship between
Lord Śiva and his Lord.



Established Truth



According to the principle of philosophical truth, Lord
Śiva is a partial manifestation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s plenary
expansion, Sadāśiva. When Kṛṣṇa desires to create, He
expands Himself as Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa, and possessing this
creative desire, Saṅkarṣaṇa expands as Mahā-Viṣṇu
(Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu). Mahā-Viṣṇu then desires to
create, and His desire takes the form of a light that

                           16
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

emanates from between his eyebrows. The semblance or dim
twilight reflection of that light is called Śambhu-liṅga
(Śiva). Many people worship Lord Śiva in the form of
Śambhu-liṅga. The light itself is eternal and is not
Śambhu-liṅga; Śambhu-liṅga is its semblance or shadow.

There is another semblance called Yoni, and this is the
shadow of Ramā-devī. Ramā-devī is the spiritual potency
of Mahā-Viṣṇu, and in Vaikuṇṭha she is Lord Nārāyaṇa’s
beloved consort Lakṣmī-devī. This is her original
transcendental form, and her shadow is the limited
conceiving potency — Yoni.

Mahā-Viṣṇu has two types of potency with which he
creates the material worlds. One type of potency is
called nimitta — the instrumental cause of creation, and
the other is called upādāna — the ingredient cause.
Instrumental and ingredient causes can be explained in
this way: Suppose I say, “I killed a snake with a
stick.” The person who desired and performed the
activity is the instrumental cause (nimitta), and the
stick is the ingredient cause (upādāna). In another
example, a potter makes a pot. The desire or will of the
potter to make the pot is the instrumental cause. The
sum total of all the instruments used to create it, like
the wheel, clay, mud and water, is the ingredient cause.

Mahā-Viṣṇu’s eternal instrumental potency takes its
reflected form as Yoni, the limited shadow potency, and
the ingredient cause assumes the reflection-form of
Śambhu-liṅga. Creation then takes place by the union of
Śambhu-liṅga and his female consort Yoni. Śambhu is
called the liṅga of the Supreme Lord, which means that
he is the manifest symbol of the Lord’s male generative
capacity, and he appears for the purpose of preparing
the cosmic manifestation. That potency which gives birth
to the material creation is the energy called Māyā, and
her intrinsic form is Yoni.

Actually, the original instrumental and ingredient cause
is not Yoni and Śambhu; it is Mahā-Viṣṇu. Material
nature, as Yoni, desires to create by dint of the kāma-
bīja (desire seed) impregnated in her, and she is
therefore the secondary instrumental cause. The desire-
seed gave her the urge to create, and because she then
wanted to create, she is called the instrumental cause.
Śambhu supplies the materials of creation, and he is
therefore called the ingredient cause. Śambhu, the dim
reflection of the Supreme Lord’s own divine desire-
filled glance, consummates his union with Yoni. However,
he can do nothing independent of the energy of Mahā-
Viṣṇu.

Mahā-Viṣṇu is the Supreme personified Will, and it is he
who brings about the union of the two — Yoni and Śambhu.
He is the divine dominating person, the plenary portion
of Lord Kṛṣṇa and the creator of the mundane world. In
order for creation to take place, there must be the
desire of the Supreme Doer. He must be present. The
instrumental cause and ingredient cause must be mixed
with the desire or glance of Mahā-Viṣṇu.

The initial form of the creation is mahat-tattva, the
sum-total twenty-four elements.11 This mahat-tattva is

                           17
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

the reflection of the kāma-bīja, the original desire-
seed in Goloka Vṛndāvana. The seed of amorous creative
desire in Goloka is the embodiment of pure cognition. It
is a prototype of the sex desire in this mundane world,
though it is located far from it. The seed of the
mundane sex desire is thus the perverted reflection of
the seed of the original creative desire in Goloka
Vṛndāvana.



Service in Pastimes of Majesty



The historical narrations that follow are examples of
aiśvarya-gata-vicāra, Lord Śiva’s relationship with
Kṛṣṇa from the perspective of Kṛṣṇa’s majesty. Revealed
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, these transcendental histories
demonstrate Lord Śiva’s dependence on Him. They also
further reveal that when Śiva gives benedictions to
Kṛṣṇa’s enemies, he does so to assist in the Supreme
Lord’s pastimes, which are performed for the benefit of
all beings.



Śiva’s Dependence

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam tells of a demon named Vṛkāsura who,
desiring to enjoy Lord Śiva’s wife, Pārvatī, performed
severe austerities to ‘please’ Lord Śiva. When Lord Śiva
appeared before him to grant him a benediction, Vṛkāsura
expressed his desire that as soon as he would touch the
head of anyone, that person’s head would immediately
split open and he would die.

Lord Śiva granted this benediction, and Vṛkāsura
immediately rushed forward to use it against Lord Śiva.

Śiva asked, “What are you doing?” He replied, “Now I am
applying my benediction.” He did not say, “I want
Pārvatī.” He simply looked at Pārvatī and then ran
towards Lord Śiva. Fearful, Śiva ran away, and Vṛkāsura
immediately chased after him. Lord Śiva was attired in a
deerskin, which fell off, and then his ḍamaru drum also
fell. He kept running, however, and he remembered his
Lord. Who was the Lord he remembered? It was Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
This is aiśvarya-gata-vicāra.

Lord Śiva fled from the land to the sky and from the sky
to other planets, until he reached the limits of the
universe, but Vṛkāsura continued to chase him. The
predominating deities of higher planets, such as Brahmā,
Indra and Candra, were not able to save him from the
impending danger, and finally he approached Kṛṣṇa’s
incarnation, Lord Viṣṇu in Śvetadvīpa.

In order to protect his devotee, Lord Viṣṇu appeared as
a perfect brahmacārī, and the effulgence emanating from
his body was attractive to both Śiva and the demon.
After stopping Vṛkāsura by offering obeisances to him,
and winning his confidence by speaking sweet and
reassuring words, Lord Viṣṇu asked, “Why are you running

                           18
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

after Śiva?”

Vṛkāsura replied, “He has given me the benediction that
when I put my hand on someone’s head it will split open.
Now I will use the benediction on him.”

Lord Viṣṇu in the dress of a brahmacārī said, “You are
very foolish. You believe the benediction of this man
who smokes gañjā, takes all types of intoxication and
lives in crematoriums? Do you believe that he is
authorized and powerful enough to give benedictions? His
benediction will prove futile. He is just fooling you.
You are running after him, but in the end you will find
that his benediction is ineffective. Try it on yourself;
put your hand on your head. You will see that nothing
happens.”

Vṛkāsura agreed, “Yes, I will try.”

In this way, by Lord Viṣṇu’s sweet words and by the
expansion of his illusory energy, the demon became
bewildered. He forgot the power of Lord Śiva and his
benediction. He therefore put his hand on his own head,
it immediately split open, and he died.

This pastime gives evidence that Lord Śiva is not
independent; his worshipable Deity is Kṛṣṇa.12

Śiva’s Benefactor

All the pastimes performed by Śiva are meant to teach
everyone about Sri Kṛṣṇa’s supremacy, and to inspire
everyone to serve Him and take shelter of Him. The
following history is another example of this.

The demigods once fought with the demons and defeated
them. The demons then took shelter of their leader, Maya
Dānava, who then prepared three mystic airplane-like
residences for them. The demons thus began to vanquish
all the planetary systems.

Thereafter, when the demons began to destroy the higher
planetary systems, the rulers of those planets went to
Lord Śiva, surrendered unto him and said, “Dear Lord, we
demigods are about to be vanquished. We are your
followers. Kindly save us.”

Lord Śiva reassured them and said, “Do not be afraid.”
He fixed his arrows to his bow and released them toward
the three residences occupied by the demons, and all the
demons were killed. The great mystic Maya Dānava then
dropped the bodies of the demons into a nectarean well
he had created, making the demons return to life and
become practically invincible.

Śiva became very worried. Seeing this, Lord Kṛṣṇa in His
form as Lord Viṣṇu considered how to help him destroy
the demons. Lord Viṣṇu became a cow and Lord Brahmā
became a calf, and they entered the residences and drank
all the nectar in the well. Then, by His personal
potency of religion, knowledge, renunciation, opulence,
austerity, education and so on, Kṛṣṇa equipped Lord Śiva
with everything he needed for the battle. He manifested
a chariot, a charioteer, a flag, horses, elephants, a

                           19
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

bow, a shield and arrows, and Lord Śiva sat down on the
chariot to fight. He destroyed three residences of the
demons, the inhabitants of the higher planets glorified
and worshipped him, and he became known as Tripurāri,
the annihilator of the three dwellings of the demons.

So don’t fear. Kṛṣṇa will save you if you offer yourself
to Him. He Himself has promised this in Bhagavad-gītā.
If you hand over your complete responsibility in life to
Him — not only your bodily maintenance, but your
intelligence, your senses and everything else you
possess — He will take full care and responsibility for
you. Don’t fear. No suffering or sorrow of any kind will
be able to touch you. Moreover, you will be able to
enter the realm of bhakti and be happy forever.



Śiva’s Worshipable Deity

Further evidence of Lord Śiva’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa
in the Supreme Lord’s pastimes of majesty is found in
the history of Aniruddha. Aniruddha is the grandson of
Lord Kṛṣṇa, and he wanted to marry the daughter of
Bāṇāsura, a demonic person who was a staunch devotee of
Lord Śiva. By the blessings of Lord Śiva, Bāṇāsura had
one thousand arms, and he served Lord Śiva with all of
them. He assisted Śiva’s famous dancing by rhythmically
beating drums with his one thousand hands, and he thus
received the benediction of protection from his enemies.

Kṛṣṇa was informed by Śrī Nārada that Bāṇāsura and his
army had fought with and arrested Aniruddha for
intimately meeting with Bāṇāsura’s daughter, Ūṣā.
Therefore, in order to save Aniruddha, He called upon
His own army, the Yadu dynasty, and advanced on
Bāṇāsura’s city. When Bāṇāsura saw Lord Kṛṣṇa’s army, he
immediately ordered his men to fight.

Lord Śiva arrived there at that time, but instead of
praying to his Lord, he apparently took the side of his
own devotee, Bāṇāsura. He personally began fighting with
Kṛṣṇa as Bāṇāsura’s commander-in-chief. He shot many
weapons at Kṛṣṇa, including his Pāśupata-astra and his
ultimate weapon, the Śiva-jvara, but all of them failed.

During the battle, Bāṇāsura showered his weapons upon
Śrī Kṛṣṇa with his one thousand arms. Kṛṣṇa then cut off
his arms with His Sudarśana cakra, leaving him with only
four. Finally Lord Śiva, realizing that he was helpless
to save his devotee, surrendered to Lord Kṛṣṇa and
offered his heartfelt prayers.13

After hearing Śiva’s prayers, Lord Kṛṣṇa told him that
because Bāṇāsura was the son of Bali Mahārāja and the
great-grandson of Prahlāda Mahārāja, and because he was
favored by Lord Śiva himself, He would not only spare
Bāṇāsura’s life, but would give him immortality.



Śiva Takes Shelter

According to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Skanda Purāṇa, when

                           20
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa resided in Dvārakā, He often assumed His form as
four-handed Vāsudeva. In fact, He was famous there as
such. At that time there was a king named Pauṇḍraka, who
had attached two artificial arms on his body and
declared, “Kṛṣṇa is not the four-handed Vāsudeva. I am
that Vāsudeva.” He sent a messenger to Śrī Kṛṣṇa with
the declaration, “Stop claiming to be four-handed
Vāsudeva. I am He.” After Lord Kṛṣṇa and His royal
family laughed for a considerable time, the Lord sent a
reply to the challenge and prepared to fight.

The King of Kāśī was a staunch devotee of Lord Śiva, and
he took the side of Pauṇḍraka Vāsudeva. He had
previously received a benediction from Lord Śiva to be
able to defeat Kṛṣṇa in combat, but in this battle he
was not only defeated, but killed. With the assistance
of His Sudarśana cakra Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed Pauṇḍraka, and
by His arrows He killed the king of Kāśī. Having cut off
the head of the king, He then arranged to throw it into
the city of Kāśī.

The King had a son named Sudakṣiṇa, who was determined
to avenge the death of his father. Sudakṣiṇa thus
worshiped the lord of Kāśī, Viśvanātha — Lord Śiva — who
then instructed him to perform a special ritualistic
ceremony that calls forth a fire demon for the purpose
of killing one’s enemy. Lord Śiva also sanctioned his
ghostly companions to accompany the fire demon, and
Dvārakā then fell under attack.

Kṛṣṇa called for his Sudarśana cakra, which froze the
demon and forced him to return to Kāśī and destroy his
creators. Moreover, following behind the demon, the
Sudarśana cakra burned the entire city to ashes.

At that time even Lord Śiva himself had to run from the
city. Where his deerskin fell, he did not know. He also
left his trident and everything else, including his
wife, and quickly fled. He arrived at a place in
Navadvīpa14 called Harihara-kṣetra, and there he took
shelter of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.15 From Navadvīpa he
went to Ekāmra-kānana (now Bhuvaneśvara) near Purī, in
Orissa, where he took shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His form
as Lord Jagannātha. This pastime is aiśvarya-gata-
vicāra, and it also reveals that the worshipable Deity
of Lord Śiva is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, or Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Service in Human-like Pastimes



Lord Rāmacandra’s worship of Lord Śiva is an example of
naravata-gata-vicāra — a sweet, human-like pastime. As
stated earlier, Rāma played the role of an ordinary
human being who had to perform the difficult task of
crossing the ocean to reach Laṅkā, and he worshiped Lord
Śiva for the power to do this.

Lord Rāma established a liṅga of Rāmeśvara Mahādeva and
began worshiping him, thinking, “By Lord Śiva’s mercy I
can cross the sea.” Actually he was powerful enough to
personally jump across the ocean in a second, but he was

                           21
Siva-tattva.txt                                 5/5/2017

playing a role to inspire ordinary people. The common
people present considered that Rāmeśvara Mahādeva was in
fact the lord of Rāma, and that was why his name was
Rāmeśvara. The demigods then appeared and declared,
“Rāmeśvara Mahādeva and Rāma are both the same. There is
no difference between them. Both are īśvara; both are
God, the Supreme Lord. Ordinary people think only that
Rāmeśvara is the lord of Rāma, but they are not
intelligent. It is not like that.” At that moment Lord
Śiva manifested from the liṅga and said, “No. Try to
understand this truth. Rāmeśvara means ‘He whose Lord is
Rāma.’ Rāma is my Lord!”

The pastimes of Lord Rāma are found in Rāmāyaṇa, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, the Puranas and Rāma-carita-mānasa, and they
take place in a previous Age, called Tretā-yuga. The
demonic king Rāvaṇa had kidnapped Lord Rāma’s wife, Sītā
devī, and taken her to Laṅkā. Before Rāma knew where
Sītā had been taken, he was weeping profusely, and
Lakṣmaṇa was trying to console him. The more Lakṣmaṇa
tried to pacify him, however, the more bitterly he wept.
In this state of mind, he was beseeching the trees and
creatures of the forest, and even the Godāvarī River. He
appealed to the trees of Panjātavi forest, “O Panjātavi,
have you seen Sītā? Where has she gone? O deer, have you
seen Sītā? O Godāvarī, have you seen my dear Sītā? Why
has she left me?” Lord Rāma became maddened from
inconsolable grief.

At this time Lord Śiva and his wife Satī came to
Daṇḍakāraṇya Forest, where Lord Rāma had been living
with Sītā and His brother Lakṣmaṇa for fourteen years,
following the order of His father, King Daśaratha. Śiva
was thus present to witness Lord Rāma’s divine pastimes,
and seeing them, he was moved; his heart melted. He
offered full obeisances, with all the limbs of his body
touching the ground, and glorified Rāma: “Oh! These
pastimes are so beautiful and marvelous that they will
melt the heart of anyone who sees them.” He then
circumambulated the outer precincts of that area,
weeping due to the transcendental emotions of grief in
separation exhibited in his Lord’s pastimes.

Offering his final respects, Śiva was ready to return to
Kailāsa, when Satī asked him, “My dear husband, to whom
are you offering obeisances?” Lord Śiva replied, “Śrī
Rāma is my worshipful Deity. I worship him always.” Satī
said, “I see that Rāma is like an ordinary man weeping
for his wife. Even I know where Sītā is, but he does not
know? Why is he grieving? He appears to be a weak
person. Is he not strong enough to bring Sītā back? He
must be an ordinary man, not God. Why are you honoring
him so?”

“You are ignorant,” Lord Śiva told his doubting wife.
“You do not understand that Rāma is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.” He told her that if she did not
believe him she could conduct a test of some sort, to
determine Śrī Rāma’s position.

Lord Śiva rested under a banyan tree a little distance
away, and Satī, by her inherent mystic power, changed to
a form like Sītā’s. She went to the area where Śrī Rāma
was piteously searching for Sītā. She thought that if

                           22
Siva-tattva.txt                                  5/5/2017

she would appear before Rāma as Sītā, he would come and
embrace her in joyous relief, believing that he had
found His wife. However, although she appeared before
him again and again, He ignored her each time. He simply
looked away. Finally he said to her, “Mother, why are
you roaming alone here in the forest? Where is your
husband, Śiva?”

Satī became astonished and fearful, and wondered how
Rāma knew who she really was. She knelt in reverence,
and at that time she no longer saw the trees, plants,
and wildlife of the forest as before. She saw Sītā-Rāma
everywhere and in everything. Wherever she looked in the
forest — here, there and everywhere — she saw only Sītā-
Rāma, Sītā-Rāma, Sītā-Rāma.

In this manner, Śrī Rāma showed Satī that he and Sītā
are eternally inseparable, that he was performing this
dramatic pastime to captivate the minds of human beings
by its remembrance, and that he is, in fact, the
Personality of Godhead. She reflected, “My husband is
never ignorant. He was right and I was wrong.” Rising to
her feet, she saw that Rāma was still there alone in the
forest with Lakṣmaṇa, weeping, “Oh Sītā, where are you,
where are you?”

Then, reassuming her own form, she returned to the spot
where Śiva was waiting under the banyan tree. He asked
her, “Did you test him to see who he is?”

Satī lied, “Most respected husband, I believed you; so
there was no need to test him.”

Lord Śiva saw in a trance what had actually   happened and
silently vowed, “Satī has taken the form of   Sītā, my
mother; therefore she is no longer my wife.   She is now
my mother, and from now on I will treat her   as such.”

When he made this vow, the demigods at once showered
flowers from heaven, and they praised him, “You have
made a remarkable vow.”

Satī asked, “What vow did you make?”

Śiva remained silent.

The bona fide disciple always has faith in his self-
realized guru. Lord Śiva was the Guru of Satī, but she
had not believed him when he told her that Rāma is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If a disciple does not
obey his gurudeva, his bhakti and spiritual life will
diminish. If a disciple lies to his gurudeva, he again
goes to hell.

When Lord Śiva and Satī-devī returned to their cottage
in Kailāsa, Śiva placed her seat facing him. In Vedic
culture a wife sits on the left side of her husband and
a mother, respected as guru, sits in front of her son,
facing him.

A disciple does not offer obeisance to his gurudeva from
his guru’s right or left side, but always in front of
him. A true disciple does not remain silent, but
respectfully asks relevant questions of his guru and

                           23
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

serves him. He does not ask questions in a challenging
mood, but rather to learn. It is stated in Bhagavad-gītā
(4.34):



paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ



Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual
master. Inquire from him submissively and render service
unto him. The self-realized souls can impart knowledge
unto you because they have seen the truth.



Lord Śiva entered a trance for thousands of years, and
Satī felt severe separation from him. She thought, “Śiva
has left me. He is treating me like his mother because I
took the form of Sītā. As long as I am in this body he
will not accept me as his wife, so I will have to give
up this body.”

After some time, Satī’s father Dakṣa, the son of Lord
Brahmā and great progenitor of the universe, began a
sacrifice. Although every sacrifice is intended to
please the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu, all the demigods,
especially Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and the other
principal demigods, are invited and take part. However,
Lord Śiva was not invited to Dakṣa’s sacrifice.

The chaste Satī heard the heavenly denizens, who were
flying in the sky, speaking about the great sacrifice
being performed by her father. She saw that the wives of
the heavenly denizens, dressed in fine clothing, were
coming from all directions and were going to the
sacrifice. She approached her husband and said, “My dear
Lord, your father-in-law is now performing a great
sacrifice. All the demigods who were invited by him are
going. If you desire, we may also go.”

Lord Śiva warned her not to go, due to her father’s
enmity and envy towards him — an enmity that had begun
long before, in a former Age. Lord Śiva now remembered
his father-in-law’s harsh words spoken at that time.
Śiva had come to Dakṣa’s council, where Dakṣa was being
honored by many leaders of the universe. Dakṣa’s
daughter was married to Lord Śiva, so he considered Śiva
to be like his son. He offered obeisances to Brahmā
because Brahmā was his father, but he did not show any
respect to Śiva. Lord Brahmā welcomed Dakṣa, but Śiva
was absorbed in meditation and chanting the mahā-mantra:
“Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma
Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare.”

Insulted by Śiva’s apparent neglect and considering
himself Śiva’s superior, Dakṣa publically criticized
him. Many incidents took place as a result of that, and
Śiva returned to Kailāsa. Previous to this, Dakṣa had

                           24
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

often criticized Śiva, being disturbed that his daughter
had married such an ‘inferior person,’ but after this
incident he considered Śiva his enemy. Lord Śiva, on the
other hand, had never felt enmity towards Dakṣa.

Now Lord Śiva told Satī, “A woman can go without an
invitation to see her guru or her father and mother, but
if her father thinks that her husband is his enemy, then
she should not go to see him. You know that your father
thinks I am his enemy, although I have never considered
him as such.”

Despite her husband’s words, Satī was determined to go.
She went, but upon her arrival she observed Dakṣa
dishonoring him. She angrily condemned her father and
glorified Lord Śiva in front of all present. Then, while
meditating on Lord Śiva’s holy lotus feet, she gave up
her body in a mystic fire that manifested from her
heart.

By quitting her body, Satī was able to disconnect
herself from her offensive father and transfer herself
to another body in order to associate with Lord Śiva
without that contamination. However, her main motive was
to become free from the result of her own offenses, and
again be accepted as Lord Śiva’s beloved wife. In her
next life she took birth as Pārvatī, the daughter of the
Himālayas. In that birth she performed austerities for
many years and achieved her desired goal.

Here we see that Śiva’s worshipable Deity is Rāma, and
because Satī took the form of Sītā-devī, he left her. He
is a chaste Vaiṣṇava, always serving Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord
Rāma. Satī-devī is also a pure devotee. She is the
Supreme Lord’s divine energy, but she was playing a role
in order to give lessons to ordinary persons.

Both Śiva and Satī served in Lord Rāma’s human-like
pastimes. Rāvaṇa had not actually taken the real Sītā.
He was not able to touch her. He could only take a māyā-
sītā. The real Sītā, the transcendental potency of Rāma,
was taken away and protected by the lord of fire,
Agnideva. Rāma’s crying and asking each and every plant,
tree, mountain and river, “Where is my Sītā?” was an
exhibition of his human-like pastimes.

The great saint Tulsīdāsa has written in his Śrī Rāma-
carita-mānasa that we should accept Śrī Śiva-Pārvatī as
our Guru, and they will give us love for the lotus feet
of Rāma. Those who worship Śiva as an independent lord
are like Vṛkāsura. They want to have sense gratification
with Kṛṣṇa’s potency. Instead of becoming Vṛkāsura, we
should become devotees, and consider Śiva-Pārvatī as our
Guru in the matter of devotion to the Supreme Lord.

Consider further the identity of Lord Śiva’s worshipable
Deity. Śiva’s mantra is Rāma, and he always chants the
holy name of Rāma. To whom does this refer? Although
this also refers to Śrī Sītā-Rāma, the name he actually
chants is that of Mūla-Saṅkarṣaṇa, Balarāma, the first
expansion of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Rāmacandra is also an
expansion of mūla-Rāma (the original Rāma) — Balarāma —
but the factual worshipable Deity of Lord Śiva is
Balarāma.

                           25
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017


Ultimately, in the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, Rāma does not
refer to Daśaratha’s son Rāma, nor to Paraśurāma or
Balarāma. Lord Rāmacandra, Lord Paraśurāma and Lord
Balarāma are all manifestations of Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa.

Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa

Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare,

Hare Rāma Hare Rāma

Rāma Rāma Hare Hare



The meaning of Rāma here is Rādhā-ramaṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa who
engages in ‘ramaṇa’ with Rādhā. “Ramana” means playing
or enjoying. Kṛṣṇa enjoys playful pastimes with
Rādhārāṇī, and He is therefore called Ramaṇa or Rāma.

No Lust in Lord Śiva

The following history is another example of naravata-
gata-vicāra, or madhurya-gata-vicāra. There is also some
tattva-gata-vicāra here, and altogether it is a nectar
cup-full of madhurya (sweetness) and tattva
(philosophical truth) — tasting very good.

Lord Śiva is immensely powerful and he has no lust. He
may even be naked, and his wife Pārvatī may also be
sitting naked on his lap, but they have no lusty
desires. If an ordinary girl and boy stay close
together, especially without clothes, lust will enter
their hearts. However, this falldown does not take place
in the hearts of Lord Śiva and Pārvatī-devi under any
circumstance.

In this regard, a transcendental pastime is described in
the Sixth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Lord Śiva was once
giving a lecture in an assembly of great saintly
persons, Pārvatī was sitting on his lap, and both of
them were completely naked. At that time the exalted
devotee King Citraketu came and said in a friendly way,
“Just see the position in which you are giving your
lecture.” Pārvatī thought that he was criticizing Lord
Śiva. Disturbed by the thought that anyone would think
Lord Śiva has lusty desires in his heart, she cursed
him.

King Citraketu was on friendly terms with Lord Śiva, and
because Citraketu’s Guru is also Mūla-Saṅkarṣaṇa, he and
Śiva were god-brothers.He never meant to say that lust
was in Śiva’s heart. He was simply saying that this was
not the standard way to deliver a lecture.

Lord Śiva chastized Pārvatī and said, “Why did you curse
him? He is an exalted devotee. Look at his advancement
in bhakti. Although he is quite competent to revoke your
curse and curse you in retaliation, he has readily
accepted your curse. This is his greatness — this is the
behavior of a Vaiṣṇava.”

Lust cannot remain near Lord Śiva. Neither Lord Sadāśiva

                           26
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017

nor his partial manifestation of Śiva who stays with
Pārvatī have lust in their hearts. When Kāmadeva, Cupid,
once came to disturb Lord Śiva’s meditation, Śiva simply
opened his third eye and burned him to ashes.

How could it happen then, that Lord Śiva was attracted
to the beautiful form of Mohinī-mūrti? Mohinī is an
incarnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, and He can do
anything. It was Lord Kṛṣṇa who personally created the
attraction within Lord Śiva’s heart, and He who showed
him this form of Mohinī. In the course of serving
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, His internal bewildering energy,
yogamāyā, is so strong that it can do anything.




Chapter 4

Gatekeeper to the Abode of Love


In October of 2001, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja took a party
of six hundred pilgrims, including over two hundred
Westerners, to the sacred and beautiful town of
Jagannātha Purī on the east coast of Orissa. One of the
many holy sites visited by the pilgrims was the temple
of Lord Śiva in his form as Lokanātha Mahādeva. Arriving
at the site, the pilgrims passed through a large gate
that lead to a courtyard. On the right of the courtyard
there was a beautiful pond and on the left there were
some shops selling sweets and other items for worship.

As is the case with many Indian temples, the management
of the temple of Lokanātha Mahādeva did not allow
Westerners to enter. Therefore, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
and the Indian devotees went into the temple while the
Western devotees waited patiently in the courtyard.
After a few minutes, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja came out of
the temple alone and sat down on a slab platform in
front of one of the little shops. He was immediately
surrounded by the Western devotees, eager to hear him
speak, and the following is a transcription of his talk:



Lord Śiva is a most exalted devotee of the Supreme Lord
Kṛṣṇa. He always faithfully serves Lord Kṛṣṇa and all
His incarnations such as Lord Rāma, Lord Nṛsiṁha, Lord
Kalki, and Lord Varāha.

In this world, Lord Śiva has five different kinds of
manifestations: earth, water, fire, air and ether — of
which our body, the Earth and the universe are made. He
is also qualified to personally appear from forms
composed of these five elements, in order to serve his
Master.

You have no ability to see anything other than these
five elements. Now you cannot see the soul, which is
your self. If you develop bhakti, pure loving devotion
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then you will see Him; and by His light
you will see your own soul.

                           27
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017


We went inside the temple but we simply saw a room full
of water, so there was no need of going inside. You are
fortunate to be out here at this big pond called Gaurī-
kunda, which is a symbol of Lord Śiva. You can touch
this pond, perform ācamana, and you can offer your
obeisances here. In Bengal and other places there are
also ambu-liṅgas (liṅgas made of water), and Śiva is
worshipped in that form.

Indian devotees are fortunate to see the deity and offer
arati (worship), whereas the Western devotees are not
given permission to enter the temple. Because of this,
the Western devotees have an opportunity to come to
Lokanātha Mahādeva in a mood of great humility —
thinking themselves to be very low and fallen. In fact,
if they come with this mood, they are even more
fortunate than those devotees who went inside. If you
are out here crying to Lokanātha — Gopīśvara Mahādeva —
praying, “Please be merciful to me,” he will come to you
first, and he will sprinkle his mercy upon you. Lord
Śiva is a manifestation of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and as such, he
is always hungry for love and affection. If you are
crying and thinking, “We are very unfortunate,” Lord
Kṛṣṇa will personally come to you. He is very merciful,
so do not worry that you cannot go inside. You are most
lucky.

Wherever Kṛṣṇa resides, Sadāśiva Viṣṇu is always
present. In Mathurā and all other places where there is
a temple of Kṛṣṇa or any Viṣṇu Deity, Sadāśiva as
Lokanātha or Gopīśvara Mahādeva will be there — to serve
the Supreme Lord’s abode. Śiva serves Kṛṣṇa everywhere;
he is always in Kailāsa, always in Kāśī, and always in
Bhubaneśvara. It seems from worldly, external vision
that he sometimes leaves one place and goes to another,
but this is not the real truth.

In his pastimes he shifted from Kailāsa to Kāśī. While
in Kāśī he assisted the atheist King Kāśirāja and the
king’s friend Pauṇḍraka Vāsudeva, who artificially
became four-armed and challenged Lord Kṛṣṇa. In the
battle that ensued, Lord Kṛṣṇa severed the heads of both
Pauṇḍraka Vāsudeva and the king of Kāśī, who had
considered himself one of Lord Śiva’s best servants. The
king’s master, however, could not save him when Lord
Kṛṣṇa’s Sudarśana cakra burnt down Kāśī.

Seeing his city in flames, Lord Śiva fled. After some
time he arrived in Ekāmra-kānana in Bhubaneśvara and
took shelter of Lord Jagannātha. Lord Jagannātha told
him, “Never fear. Because you have come under my
shelter, I will give you the post of Lokanātha, the
protector of my abode. If anyone comes to this holy
place and takes my transcendental association without
taking yours, his coming here will not be complete. He
must come to your place after visiting me, and then his
mission here will be accomplished and he will become
happy.”

Lord Śiva is extremely kind by nature, and he is the
abode of love. In this regard, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written (Saṅkalpa-kalpadruma
103):

                           28
Siva-tattva.txt                                 5/5/2017




sanaka-sanandana-sanātana-nāradeḍya

gopīśvara! vraja-vilāsi-yugāṅghri-padme

prema prayaccha nirupādhi namo namas te



O gatekeeper of Vṛndāvana! O Soma, all glories to you! O
you whose forehead is decorated with the moon, and who
is worshipable by the sages headed by Sanaka, Sanandana,
Sanātana and Nārada! O Gopīśvara! Desiring that you
bestow upon me prema, divine love for the lotus feet of
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava, who perform joyous pastimes in Vraja-
dhāma, I offer praṇāmas unto you time and again.



We pray, “O Lord Śiva, even great personalities like Śrī
Nārada Muni and the four Kumāras worship you. You can
give love and affection like that of the gopīs. In your
purest form of Gopīśvara Mahādeva, you are very
powerful. You are hari-hara-eka-ātmā, which means that
Kṛṣṇa has become your ātmā and you have become His
ātmā.”

Here, ātmā means dearmost or very beloved, so Lord Kṛṣṇa
and Lord Śiva are one at heart. Lord Śiva serves the
Supreme Lord as Hanuman, as Bhīma, as Madhvācārya, as
Advaita Ācārya at the time of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
and in so many other forms.

We have come here to beg for the mercy of Lokanātha, but
personally I don’t see Lokanātha here. I see Gopīśvara
Mahādeva, of whom Lokanātha is an expansion.

Please repeat after me:[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja uttered
each half line of the above-mentioned Sanskrit prayer
alone, and the assembled pilgrims responded in unison.
Then he shared with them its deep and intimate purport:]

We pray, “O Gopīśvara Mahādeva, we have come to you.
Here your name is changed. You have manifested as
Lokanātha, but we don’t know you as Lokanātha. We only
know you as Gopīśvara Mahādeva. You cannot cheat us by
hiding from us. You can cheat demons like Rāvaṇa, Kaṁsa,
Jarāsandha, and others, but you can never cheat us. This
is because we have taken shelter of Yogamāyā Paurṇamāsī.
If you cheat us, we will have to complain to Paurṇamāsī,
and she will ‘punish’ you. Do you remember when all the
gopīs slapped your cheeks so much that your cheeks
became swollen? Kindly remember this.” [See page 8,
footnote 3]

Pleased by the love expressed in this prayer, Lord Śiva
will appear in his form of Gopīśvara Mahādeva. He will
be very helpful, and happy to give mercy.



Lokanātha Mahādeva kī jaya!

                              29
Siva-tattva.txt                                5/5/2017


Śrī Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva kī jaya!

Kāmeśvara Mahādeva kī jaya!

Nandīśvara Mahādeva kī jaya!

Cakaleśvara Mahādeva kī jaya!

Pārvatī-pati kī jaya!

Śrī Śrī Śaṅkara kī jaya!

Hara Hara Hara Hara Mahādeva kī jaya!



I have shared something special with you. As you are
sitting outside and feeling separation from Lord Śiva,
he will surely sprinkle his mercy upon you.



Table of Contents

Chapter 1 Lord Śiva's Highest Benediction

Chapter 2 The Post and The Person

Chapter 3 Three Considerations

Chapter 4 Gatekeeper to the Abode of Love

Preface

Chapter 1 Lord Śiva's Highest Benediction

Chapter 2 The Post and The Person

Chapter 4 Gatekeeper to the Abode of Love




                              30
