Their Lasting Relation.txt                       5/5/2017

Their Lasting Relation

-An Historical Account-



From lectures and letters by

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda

and Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja




A Brief History

My Mission in the West

A Locked Treasure Chest

The Divine Disappearance of Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī

Letter of Condolence

Prabhupāda's Final Order:

Because of His Divine Grace

Mahā-Viṣṇu or Mahāprabhu?

The Essence of All Advice

Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Glory




A Brief History


In June 1996, at the Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa Temple in Orange
County, California, Siddhānta dāsa of Illumination
Television (ITV) interviewed Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
regarding his relationship with Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Interviewer: Please tell us how you first met Śrīla
Prabhupāda, and any circumstance you may have had with
him when any characteristics of the pure devotee may
have been exhibited.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: I was the personal servant of
my gurudeva, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, and I always traveled with him. We had a maṭha
(preaching center and āśrama) in Calcutta, called
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. It was there that I met Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja in 1946 or 1947. Whenever
Gurudeva used to come to Calcutta, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja
would come to see him. Both were disciples of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Ṭhākura, and they were
also bosom friends. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja met Śrīla

                              1
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda in about
1922, and about four years before that, in 1918, Guru
Mahārāja took initiation from him. So Guru Mahārāja was
the elder godbrother of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, and they
were intimate friends from the beginning.

When there were some problems in the Gauḍīya mission in
1939–1940, Guru Mahārāja went to Prayāga (Allahabad), to
the house of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja. At that time, Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja had a very good medical shop there, and
he was also very renounced. Guru Mahārāja spent about
five to six months with him there.

In 1941, our gurudeva, along with Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja, established the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samītī
in Calcutta. At that time, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was
Abhaya Babu. I went to the maṭha in 1946, and perhaps at
the same time, or maybe one month after, I arrived in
Calcutta. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja again came there. I was
the personal servant of my gurudeva and I also served
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was so happy
to see my service to Gurudeva. He asked some questions
and became very pleased with my replies. He asked me,
“What is your name? From where have you joined?” And
thus I began to serve him.

In 1953, Guru Mahārāja started two magazines, called Śrī
Bhagavata Patrika and Gauḍīya Patrika. Gauḍīya Patrika
was in Bengali and Śrī Bhagavat Patrika was in Hindi.
Guru Mahārāja requested Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja to be the
editor-general of both journals. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja
accepted and began to write many good articles,
especially regarding Bhagavad-gītā – from beginning to
end. Those who are not actually following Kṛṣṇa and
Vedānta are not really religious persons. This is
especially how Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja wrote about
māyāvādīs in his Gītā articles. Those who think that
Kṛṣṇa and His body are the same are Vaiṣṇavas. But those
who think that Kṛṣṇa’s soul and body are different are
māyāvādīs. They don’t know anything about the meaning of
Gītā. One learned doctor, the president of India, Dr.
Sarvapalli Rādhākrishnan, was very famous in Western
countries for his philosophy, but he wrote that Kṛṣṇa’s
body was one thing and the spirit soul of Kṛṣṇa was
another. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja wrote against this. He
wrote very strongly in regard to Vedānta, and especially
about the Gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He wrote that
Kṛṣṇa, His body, His possessions and everything in
relation to Him is the same sat-cid-ānanda substance.

One copy was sent from Mathurā to Dr. Radhakrishnan and
one to each of the learned persons of the parliament.
Dr. Radhakrishnan did not reply. They cannot reply,
because māyāvāda is against the path of bhakti. There
are so many arguments, but it would take time to
explain. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja gave me his articles in
Bengali, and I used to translate them into Hindi. I had
a very close relationship with him.

I knew him as a very good and staunch philosopher. He
had not gone to any colleges for learning Sanskrit, Gītā
or Vedānta. He was a born philosopher and a pure
devotee. He was a mahā-bhāgavata, but he played the role
of a madhyama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇava to give help and

                             2
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

initiation to others. An uttama-adhikari does not give
initiation to anyone, because he thinks that everyone is
a mahā-bhāgavata and always serving Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja was in this position,
playing the role of a madhyama-adhikārī. I realized who
he was by his words and his association.

In 1955, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja lived in our maṭha in
Mathurā for more than five months, and he gave daily
classes there. He would read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and speak
on the pastimes of Prahlada, Citraketu, Kapila and
Devahūti, and child Krsna as Dāmodara.

I used to cook for him then and assist him in many other
ways. I used to give him many books from my library room
to assist him in his translating of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
and after some time he went to Delhi and published three
volumes of the First Canto.

Then, with no money, not a farthing, he came to the
West. When he was in New York in 1965, he requested me
by letter, “You should come with me. I am alone and I
will have to do something here; so you should come.” I
replied “My gurudeva is here, and I am serving him. When
he will return to Bengal I may come.” Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja wrote back, “Very good. You should serve your
gurudeva, but when you have the chance you should
certainly come and join me.” I replied, “Yes, I will
come.” After that I sent all his books – Bhagavad-gītā,
Rāmānujacarya’s bhāṣya (Śrī-bhāṣya), Śaṅkara’s bhāṣya
(Śārīraka-bhāṣya), and other bhāṣyas (commentaries) to
New York. A few days ago I saw those books in Los
Angeles. Not all, but some of them are there. I also
sent him mṛdaṅgas, karatālas, vigrahas of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, and also ten kilos of sweet pera every month.

In 1967, when Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja returned to India
with Kīrtanānanda, I was the only person to meet him at
the airport in Delhi. We went to the Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa temple
in Delhi, and I used to live there at his request so
that I could render various services to him. Then, when
Acyutānanda came, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja told me, “I am
not well; I’m tired. So you go with Kīrtanānanda and
Acyutānanda to some persons’ homes; and you will have to
give the lectures there.” I did so.

Later, after Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja returned to Vṛndāvana,
to the Rādhā-Dāmodara temple, I often came to visit him.
There he discussed so many things about Vedānta, and
especially about Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He discussed many
principles of bhakti, and he explained that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came to this world especially to taste
Śrīmatī Rādhika’s mood: anarpita-carīṁ cirāt
karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ
sva-bhakti-śriyam. He gave such high-class, deep
association there, and he loved me so much.

Later, in 1968, our gurudeva disappeared from this
world, and I sent a message to Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, who
was at that time in Seattle. When he received it, he at
once replied to me, as though he was weeping while
writing. He wrote, “I am so much aggrieved because of
this.” He composed a śloka and explained, “Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was weeping for his gurudeva,

                             3
Their Lasting Relation.txt                      5/5/2017

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, and I am feeling like this:
vairāgya-vidyā-nija-bhakti-yoga; apayayan mām anabhipsu
andhām; śrī-keśava-bhakti-prajñāna-nāma. I was not in a
mood to take the renounced order. I was fearing so much.
My family rejected me and I was penniless, but still I
was not ready to take sannyāsa and fulfill my gurudeva’s
order to go to Western countries to preach his mission.
But pūjyapāda Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja
gave me sannyāsa, the renounced order, and he told me,
‘You must accept this.’” Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja wrote me
that this was his śraddhānjali to Gurudeva’s lotus feet.

The renounced order is not a play. It changes one’s
entire life and it means that one is aspiring for gopī-
bhāva. Some say that Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was only a
cowherd friend of Kṛṣṇa, but I strongly oppose this. His
sannyāsa-mantra was a gopī-mantra, and he has also taken
gopal-mantra. Those who are second initiated know the
meaning of gopal-mantra. Without it, no one can have the
mood that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted to give. So I
have heard from him directly, and also by hearing his
lectures I know, that he has come in the line of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu – to give this mission. This was
also the mission of Śrila Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. They are both
associates of Kṛṣṇa and Mahāprabhu. They are not of this
world. So Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has not come only to give
dharma (religious principles). He has not come only to
give the yuga-dharma of harināma. This was not the
primary mission of Mahāprabhu; it was the mission of
Mahā-Viṣṇu, or Advaita Ācārya.

When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu comes, taking the mood of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, He teaches gopi-prema. It is that prema
which He wanted to give to the jīvas.

prema-rasa-niryāsa karite āsvādana

rāga-mārga bhakti loke karite pracāraṇa

rasika-śekhara kṛṣṇa parama-karuṇa

ei dui hetu haite icchāra udgama

The Lord’s desire to appear was born from two reasons:
He wanted to taste the sweet essence of the mellows of
love of God, and He wanted to propagate devotional
service in the world on the platform of spontaneous
attraction. Thus He is known as supremely jubilant and
as the most merciful of all.

[Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (4.15–16)]

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has come to the Western countries
only to establish the mission of his guru-parampara –
nothing new – only their mission. He has not written any
new books. He has translated the Gītā, and he has given
its purports. He has also given purports to Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, Śrī Īśopaniṣad and other books. He has given
the names of the paramparā, from Nārada to Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and down to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura. So he was not out of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava line.
He is a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava. We should not try to cut his
link with the Gauḍīya mission or the Gauḍīya Maṭha: our

                             4
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

disciplic order.

I can tell something about his mission in Western
countries. He was always connected with the sampradāya.
At first he has plowed and turned barren land into
cultivated land – thus fertilizing it. He planted seeds,
and these seeds should never stay the same. They should
sprout, they should grow, and they should give sweet
fruits. We should increase our devotional activities –
our Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We should not remain third-
class Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has written everything in his
books, including what he could not speak much about at
that time. Those who think that he is dead are
themselves dead. He is always giving inspiration to the
whole world. If we serve him, we will see his books with
quite new meaning. Then we can properly read these books
and become more qualified.

I learned from him that we should associate with
devotees who are more bona fide and advanced than
ourselves. We should honor them. We should see that all
devotees are in one family, Lord Caitanya’s family. If
we do not think in this way, we cannot be devotees. We
should think that we are in one family, and there are so
many hands. Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja have thousands and thousands of hands,
and we should honor all their hands; we should honor all
those who are chanting the name. I heard him say that
those who are chanting the holy name, even if they have
not taken initiation, should also be honored. Those who
have taken initiation and are chanting should be more
honored. And those who are mahā-bhāgavata should be
served by all means. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has written
all this in his translations. So I pray that those who
were initiated by Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja be very broad-
minded. They should know that I am actually the first
disciple of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, from before ISKCON was
founded.

There are two kinds of gurus – śikṣā and dīkṣā – and
both are the same. Sometimes the śikṣā-guru is superior,
and sometimes the dīkṣā-guru may be. The relationship
with the śikṣā-guru is very friendly; he is like a bosom
friend. The dīkṣā-guru should be very much respected,
and so we may somewhat fear him. But the śikṣā-guru is
like a friend, sometimes sitting on the same seat as us.

I used to sit with Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja on the same bed
or āsana. Then, during his last days, I went to
Vṛndāvana to see him. Taking my hands and putting them
in his hands, he told me that I should sit on his bed,
but I offered praṇāma to it and sat on a chair. He told
me, “I have got so many disciples, but they don’t know
very much. You should try to help them. Especially my
samādhi should be given by your own hands. I want this.”
Tears came to his eyes as he was ordering this, and I
told him, “You are my śikṣā-guru. Though you and I are
friends, I always consider you my śikṣā-guru. I will
always follow your instructions, word for word, letter
for letter.” Then I told all the disciples present,
especially the leading disciples, “You should not think
that Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja is going to die. You should

                             5
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

think that he has a mission to help the Western
countries. After his going, you should be united and try
to honor each other. Give his mission to the countries
where he could not go. Don’t cheat his mission. It is
most high level to follow his orders. You should all try
to be broad-minded and don’t try to control anyone. You
can’t get sneha and premā, love and affection, by
controlling and accumulating money. You can’t control by
giving orders.” Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja called them, “Come
on, come on. Listen to Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. Hear what he
has to say.”

Just after Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s departure, many
devotees came from Mathurā to Vṛndāvana and we performed
nagara-saṅkīrtana. I lead the kīrtana, and then I put
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja in samādhi with Vedic mantras and
all other Vedic arrangements. Most of the renounced
people of Vṛndāvana, including bābājīs from all four
sampradāyas, came there, and I organized everything,
including who should do the public speaking and in what
order people should speak. I honored all, just as Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja asked me to do in his final words.

Interviewer: Of all the qualities Śrīla Prabhupāda
exhibited, does one stand out in your mind?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: The symptoms of guru have been
written in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Gītā, and I saw these
symptoms in Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja:

tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham

To understand things properly, one must humbly approach,
with firewood in hand, a spiritual master who is learned
in the Vedas and firmly devoted to the Absolute Truth.”
[Mundaka Upaniṣad (1.2.12)]

He was brahma-niṣṭhā, one who has given up all other
activities and has dedicated his life to working only
for Kṛṣṇa.

tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

Therefore, any person who seriously desires real
happiness must seek a bona fide spiritual master and
take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of
the bona fide guru is that he has realized the
conclusions of the scriptures by deliberation and is
able to convince others of these conclusions. Such great
personalities, who have taken shelter of the Supreme
Godhead, leaving aside all material considerations,
should be understood to be bona fide spiritual masters.
[Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.21)]

We see that one symptom of guru is that he knows
Vedānta, Upadeśāmṛta, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā,

                             6
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

etc. He should be siddhānta-vit (knower of all
philosophical conclusions), so that he can clear all the
doubts of his disciples. I know that Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja was very much qualified in this. He knew
everything. He was perfect in this.

Second, guru should be detached from worldly things, and
I know that Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja had no attachment. He
had attachment to those who are thoroughly attached to
Kṛṣṇa. The guru should have realization of his iṣṭadeva,
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. One
cannot preach without realization. If he is not
factually practicing bhakti, and he has no realization,
then his words will vanish into the air. No one will be
able to truly follow his instructions.

I have realized this: that any disciple, or anyone else,
who came to Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was overpowered by him.
He conquered their hearts with love and affection.
Without realization of Kṛṣṇa, no one can do this.

It has been said in Bhagavad-gītā (4.34):

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁj

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual
master. Inquire from him submissively and render service
unto him. The self-realized souls can impart knowledge
unto you because they have seen the truth.

Who is tattva-darśi? One who knows all siddhānta in all
the Vedas, Upaniṣads and other śāstras. Praṇipātena
paripraśnena. You should go to such a guru, again and
again, very honorably questioning and serving him. I see
how Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja went to Śrīla Prabhupāda
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, how he accepted him
as his gurudeva, and especially how, in a very short
time, he spread his prema, his mission, Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s mission, to the whole world. This was the
śakti – the energy, the potency of Caitanya Mahāprabhu
and his gurudeva – that he could do all this. No common
person could have done what he did.

I remember another instance. The last time I saw Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja (the evening before he departed from this
world) he was so friendly to me. He told me, “I have
done something wrong in my life, so I want to be
forgiven. You should especially forgive me, because you
have served me and you are so dear to me.” I said, “No,
don’t say this. Anyone who comes in a special situation,
at a special time, can say anything to encourage new
devotees. We also say things like this. So I don’t think
you have done anything wrong.” Then he told me, “You
should forgive me, and you should tell all my
godbrothers to forgive me. When I told some disciples,
‘Don’t mix with anyone; don’t mix with my godbrothers,’
it was in a letter, not in my books; and I told this
only for a special time.” Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was a

                             7
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

first-class Vaiṣṇava, a mahā-bhāgavata; and he wrote
like this only for third-class, kaniṣṭha, devotees.

I had once asked him, “Mahārāja, we are friends. I want
to know why your Deities have names which are not
siddhāntic, like Rādhā- Pārtha-sārathi and Rukmiṇī-
Dvārakādhīśa. Regarding Rukmiṇī-Dvārakādhīśa, I know
that in 1968 you established and performed prāṇa-
pratiṣṭhā (the installation ceremony) of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
with peacock feather and flute, and with Rādhā there on
His left side.”

He replied, “When I established Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Los
Angeles, I gave Them the name ‘Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’, and then I
left Los Angeles to go to India. When I returned I saw
that someone had changed the name to Rukmiṇī-
Dvārakādhīśa. I became very angry with that person. I
was against this name, but now this name has come
about.”

Regarding Rādhā-Pārtha-sārathi, he told me he was very
ill at the time and his disciples gave this name without
his actual approval.

I read in his books that this is rasa-ābhāsa. Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja has written this, not only in one place
but in many places. He told me not to think that this
was his idea, and I told him, “My doubt is gone, and I
pray that you bless me so that I may be like you in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness.” He benedicted me, and I felt so
glad, so fortunate, to think that he ordered me to
always serve him.

Interviewer: I understand that Śrīla Prabhupāda was
having many difficulties and harassments in Bombay to
keep his centers, and you took some role to keep
ISKCON’s property?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Some years ago Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja’s son told the Bombay court that he was a
vaiśya, a businessman – that he was not a sannyāsī. His
son said that only a brāhmaṇa can take sannyāsa. Because
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was a businessman, he went to the
West for business, and ISKCON is a family business. The
son’s conclusion was that he himself is the master of
all of ISKCON’s property. An ISKCON leader came and told
me, “If you don’t give evidence, this son will take all
of ISKCON, all over the world.” He told me that I should
go immediately. I told him that I only want to serve
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, so I will go. After that I went to
Bombay several times and sat in court the entire day.
Every day I would take prasādam early in the morning, at
about 7 a.m., and then immediately go to the court. I
want to always serve the mission of Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja.




My Mission in the West




                             8
Their Lasting Relation.txt                        5/5/2017


This is an excerpt from a lecture given during Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s first Western preaching tour. The
lecture took place in San Francisco on June 30, 1996.

I have come from Mathurā, Vṛndāvana, but I do not feel I
have left there. Everywhere I see very bona fide
devotees, just as in Vṛndāvana.

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura ordered Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja to go to the West to spread the holy name
of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the message of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and he came about forty years later. Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja similarly ordered me and I have also
come, about twenty years later. He has ordered me and I
have come.

My mission in the Western countries has three purposes.
First, I want to take the dust from Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja`s lotus feet by going to the places he
preached in Europe and here in America. He first came to
New York, so I also wanted to go there. When he came he
was penniless, singing Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Rāma on the streets. He wrote me from there,
and I sent him the books he wanted, as well as many
pairs of deities of Gaura-Nityānanda Prabhu and Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa. I also sent him karatālas, mṛdaṅgas and many
other paraphernalia.

Second, I have come here to give his message to the
entire world. He has planted the seeds and they have
somewhat grown, but they are lacking water. Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja has given me that water, which is his hari-
kathā, and according to my ability I am carrying this
water everywhere. I am so happy to carry out his
instructions, and to take his foot-dust from the places
he has sanctified.

The third purpose of my traveling is to help the sincere
devotees who are unhappy due to long-term lack of good
association. I have come to tell them, “You should see
that your Prabhupāda is here among you. You must again
become powerful and energetic, just as you were at the
time of his manifested appearance. Think neither that he
is dead, nor that he is not here. I did not know any of
you before, but Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has done such
marvelous things that on this Pacific seacoast, from Los
Angeles to San Francisco to Vancouver, and to wherever I
go, many devotees are coming to see me.

I am grateful to Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, and I am offering
the lotus flowers of my devotion to his feet. He has
performed a miracle, and if he were here today, he would
preach more and more. He has written and translated so
many books, which have been translated into over forty
languages.

Now, however, eighty or ninety percent of the devotees
have left ISKCON. I want that ISCKON become more and
more powerful. Everyone should be strengthened and
everyone should preach all over the world, just as Śrīla
Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja has preached.

I will speak some hari-kathā from Sri Caitanya-

                             9
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

caritāmṛta and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and I will try to
quench your thirst so that the bona fide honor and
appreciation you have for your Prabhupāda will increase.
He will bless us all, and he will be so happy that you
have come.




A Locked Treasure Chest


This is an excerpt from Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s
lecture at the Ātmānanda Yoga Center in New York City on
July 12, 1996.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has given everything in his books.
He knew that a child of one year, or two years, or even
five years, could not retain all the information. A
father or mother save money for their child, keeping it
in a locked box. When the child is mature, he will be
qualified to take the treasures inside. Before maturity,
however, the child would waste that treasure. Similarly,
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja kept all his treasures in his
books. If you want to open them, you should know that
the key is in the hands of the bhāgavata (the pure,
self-realized devotee).

There are two bhāgavatas – grantha-bhāgavata, the Vedic
scriptures, and bhakta-bhāgavata, the pure devotee who
embodies those scriptures. Bhakta-bhāgavata is superior,
as the key to understanding the scriptures is with bona
fide bhaktas who have prema. They can open the lock.
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has kept the treasure which Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī left in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu and his
other books, and his own books are full of treasures. In
his purports we see all the teachings that are in Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s books. Śrī Upadeśāmṛta (Nectar of
Instruction), for example, gives the process by which we
can go to Vṛndāvana and follow Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Some persons say, “We are not qualified, and we will
never be qualified, to hear about Goloka.” I think that
is quite wrong, because Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has written
about it in his books. When we are matured and
qualified, then we can actually taste that nectar and go
to that place which Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrī Vyāsadeva, and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja have written about.




The Divine Disappearance of Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī


The following is a lecture given by Śrīla Prabhupāda in
Seattle, Washington, on October 21, 1968, just after he
was infromed of the disappearance of his intimate
godbrother and sannyāsa-guru.


                             10
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

One has to accept the renounced order from another
person who is in the renounced order. I never thought
that I shall accept this renounced order of life. In my
family life, when I was in the midst of my wife and
children, sometimes I was dreaming that my spiritual
master was calling me, and I was following him. When my
dream was over, I was thinking – I was little horrified:
“Oh, Guru Mahārāja wants me to become a sannyāsī. How
can I accept sannyāsa?” At that time I was not very
satisfied that I will have to give up my family and
become a mendicant. At that time, it was a horrible
feeling. Sometimes I was thinking, “No, I cannot take
sannyāsa,” but again I saw the same dream.

So in this way I was fortunate. My Guru Mahārāja
(Prabhupāda begins to cry and his voice is choked)
pulled me out from this material life. I have not lost
anything. He was so kind upon me. I have gained. I left
three children, and I have got now three hundred
children; so I am not a loser. It is material conception
to think that we shall be losers by accepting Kṛṣṇa.
Nobody is a loser. I say this from my practical
experience. I was thinking, “How can I accept this
renounced order of life? I cannot accept so much
trouble.”

But I retired from my family life, and I was sitting
alone in Vṛndāvana, writing books. My godbrother
insisted “Bhaktivedānta Prabhu...” This title was given
in my family life. It was offered to me by the Vaiṣṇava
society. So he insisted. Actually it is not he who
insisted to me. Practically my spiritual master insisted
to me through him, saying, “You accept.” Without
accepting the renounced order of life, nobody can become
a preacher, and he wanted me to become a preacher. So he
forced me through this godbrother, who said, “You
accept.”

Unwillingly I accepted; and then I remembered that he
wanted me to go to the Western countries. So I am
feeling now very much obliged to my godbrother, because
he carried out the wish of my spiritual master and
forced me to accept this sannyāsa order.

This godbrother, His Holiness Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, is no longer in this world. He
has entered Kṛṣṇa’s abode. So I wish to pass a
resolution of bereavement and send it to them. I have
also composed one verse in this connection. All of you
present, you sign this. I shall send it tomorrow.

The verse I have composed is in Sanskrit: vairāgya-
vidyā-nija-bhakti-yoga. This Kṛṣṇa consciousness is
vairāgya-vidyā. Vairāgya-vidyā means to become detestful
of this material world. That is called vairāgya-vidyā,
and that is possible simply by bhakti-yoga. Vairāgya-
vidyā-nija-bhakti-yogam apayayan mām. The child is
afraid to take medicine, and that also I have
experienced. In my childhood, when I became ill, I was
very stubborn and I would say, “I won’t accept any
medicine.” So my mother used to force medicine into my
mouth with a spoon. I was so obstinate. Similarly, I did
not want to accept this sannyāsa order, but this
godbrother forced me and said, “You must.” Apayayan mām;

                             11
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

he forcefully made me drink this medicine. Anabhipsu
andham. Why was I unwilling? Anabhipsu means unwilling.
Andham means one who is blind, who cannot see his
future. Spiritual life is the brightest future, but the
materialists cannot see this. The Vaiṣṇavas and the
spiritual master therefore forcefully say, “Drink this
medicine.” Apayayan mām anabhipsu andham. Śrī-keśava-
bhakti-prajñāna-nama.

So my godbrother – his name is Keśava, Srila Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja – did this favor for me
because he was an ocean of mercy, kṛpāmbudhi. We offer
our obeisances to Vaiṣṇavas: vāñchā-kalpa-tarubhyaś ca
kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca. The Vaiṣṇavas, the
representatives of the Lord, are so kind. They bring the
ocean of mercy to distribute it to suffering humanity.
Kṛpāmbudhir yas tam ahaṁ prapadye. So I am offering my
respectful obeisances unto this His Holiness, because he
forcefully made me adopt this sannyāsa order.

He is no more in this world. He has entered Kṛṣṇa’s
abode, and therefore I am offering my respectful
obeisances, along with my disciples. On the first day of
my sannyāsa, I remembered that I’ll have to speak in
English. I remembered this on that sannyāsa day, when
there was a reception, so I first of all spoke in
English. This was all the arrangement of higher
authority, of Kṛṣṇa.

We are writing this: “Resolved that we, the undersigned
members and devotees of the International Society for
Krishna Consciousness Incorporated, in a condolence
meeting under the presidency of His Divine Grace A.C.
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī, today, the 21st of October, 1968,
at our Seattle branch, express our profound bereavement
on hearing of the passing of His Divine Grace Om
Visnupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, the sannyāsa-guru, preceptor, of our spiritual
master, on October 6th, 1968, at his headquarter
residence in Navadvipa, West Bengal. We offer our
respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, with the
following verse composed on this occasion by our
spiritual master.” This verse I have already explained
to you. So I wish that you all sign it, and I will send
it tomorrow by air mail.

Have you got a pencil?

Govinda dāsī: Yes.

(sound of Prabhupāda signing)




Letter of Condolence


This letter by Śrīla Prabhupāda was originally written
in Bengali on the occasion of the disappearance of Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. It was
addressed to Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja,

                             12
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

one of the prominent disciples of Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. It was then translated into
Hindi by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and
printed in Śrī Bhagavat Patrika magazine in December
1968. The following is the English translation of that
letter.



All Glories to Śrī Guru & Gaurāṅga

Seattle, Washington

October 22, 1968



I offer my humble prostrated obeisances at the lotus
feet of all the Vaiṣṇavas.



Śrīpāda Trivikrama Mahārāja,1

Yesterday I received your letter dated October 12, and
its contents were heart-breaking. Kindly inform me of
the details of the sudden disappearance of pūjyapāda
Mahārāja (Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja). I had a very longstanding intimate
relationship with Śrīla Mahārāja. I used to visit
Śrīpāda Narahari Dādā2 and Śrīpāda Vinoda Dādā3 with
great affection. They were my extremely loving friends.
Also in Calcutta, senior Tirtha Mahārāja, Professor
Nishikanta Sannyala, and Vasudeva Prabhu were very dear
to me. Afterwards I used to visit and associate freely
with Śrīpāda Śrīdhara Mahārāja, as if we were the
closest of family members. Except for Śrīpāda Śrīdhara
Mahārāja, all of the above-mentioned Vaiṣṇavas have
gradually disappeared. Our time is also approaching, so
it will be best to have the opportunity to serve Śrīla
Prabhupadā as long as possible.

I have a very close connection with Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti.4 Yourself, and particularly Śrīpāda Vamana
Mahārāja,5 know well that I am one of three persons who
founded Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti at Bosapada Lane,
Calcutta, even before Śrīla (Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava)
Mahārāja accepted sannyāsa. Within a few days of the
formation of the Samiti, Śrī Narottamānanda Brahmacārī
(presently Tridaṇḍi Swāmī Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Kamala
Madhusūdana Mahārāja) separated himself from it. At that
time Śrīpāda Vāmana Mahārāja, who was then a brahmacārī,
visited our home at Sitakanta Banaraji Lane. He made me
the president of the Bengali magazine, Śrī Gauḍīya
Patrika.6

Respecting the order of Śrīla Mahārāja, I started
writing articles for the Gauḍīya Patrika regularly, and
Śrīla Mahārāja greatly appreciated whatever I wrote.
Thereafter, I was also appointed as the president of the
Hindi magazine, Śrī Bhagavata Patrika, and many of my
articles were published in that. Afterwards I could not
submit articles due to lack of time. Now I have become a
resident of foreign lands and I have to travel twenty

                             13
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

thousand miles every year.

The greatest compassion of Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja upon me was to make me a sannyāsī. I
had taken a vow that I would never accept sannyāsa, but
Śrīla Mahārāja forcibly gave it to me. He would
certainly have been most pleased today to see the
success of my preaching. Last year I visited him in
Calcutta along with my disciples, and despite his being
bed-ridden, he was very pleased to receive us. I have
complete confidence that both in his manifest presence
and after his disappearance he must be very pleased to
see my widespread preaching of the message of Śrīman
Mahaprabhu in Western countries like America, Canada,
England, Germany, and Hawaii (Honolulu), situated in the
Pacific Ocean, as well as in Eastern countries like
Japan (Tokyo) and so on.

I was a staunch gṛhamedī (one whose intelligence is
absorbed in household affairs). Śrīla Prabhupāda used to
come to me in dreams from time to time, and call me to
renounce family life and come along with him. The dreams
would frighten me and make me think that I would have to
accept sannyāsa. I didn’t have any desire to take
sannyāsa. However, upon the repeated insistence of
Śrīpāda Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja bestowed boundless mercy upon this
unwilling and blind person, by forcibly giving me
sannyāsa. It seems that this desire of Śrīla Prabhupāda
was transmitted into his heart, and thus that my
sannyāsa was accomplished.

So I am eternally indebted to Śrīla Mahārāja. Therefore,
immediately after receiving your letter, I organized a
viraha-sabhā, a meeting at the Seattle temple to honor
his disappearance. I am sending the condolence
resolution of the meeting along with this letter. Kindly
accept it as our śraddhānjali, humble homage. In my
other centers (the list is enclosed), particularly
London, Hamburg, and Honolulu, I have given instruction
to arrange a viraha-sabhā and offer śraddhānjali homage
likewise.

You will be glad to know that I have formed three
saṅkīrtana parties comprising American youths and
couples under my guidance. One such party is currently
traveling to cities in America, and I am also with this
party. The second party, of six devotees, is performing
kīrtana at different places in London. The Indians
living there are amazed to see them. Those Indians have
given up their homeland and come all the way to the
Western world to attain wealth and reputation, but the
Americans are performing harināma-saṅkīrtana. Somehow
the preaching activities are going on very nicely.

I am interested to know what kind of constitution you
are forming. In this matter you will receive my complete
cooperation, because I am a man of constructive ideas. I
do not like destructive policies.

It was the desire of Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura that Americans perform kīrtana in
Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, and that opportunity has now come.
Unfortunately, those who have intruded into Māyāpura

                             14
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

consider it to be their personal property, and these
days others are restricted from visiting that place.
Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja used to
deal with these guru-tyāgīs (those who renounce their
guru) and guru-bhogīs (those who enjoy the property of
their guru) with sword in hand.

In this regard, last year he mentioned that he would
arrange five acres of land for me in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura.
You were present at that time. If you help me in this
matter, I intend to make an āśrama in Māyāpura. American
boys and girls can visit and stay there and receive
proper training. By our cooperation, preaching
activities can be done very nicely. Therefore, I am
eager to know the details of your constitution.

I am going to Montreal tommorow. From there I will go to
Santa Fe (New Mexico) and to Los Angeles. I am sending
the addresses of our centers with this letter. We are
executing a plan to build New Vṛndāvana on three hundred
acres of land. Kindly reply to the Los Angeles-Hollywood
address, as I will be staying three days in Montreal,
seven days in Santa Fe, and almost one month in Los
Angeles.

pṛthivīte āche yata nagarādi grāma

sarvatra pracāra haibe mora nāma

In every town and village, the chanting of My name will
be heard. [Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata (Antya-khaṇḍa 4.126)]

Preaching can be spread extensively throughout the world
on the basis of this system. I think that your
constitution must be directly in accordance with the
above prediction. I hope your bhajana is going on
nicely.

Your obedient servant,

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Swāmī



Footnotes:

1 Śrīla Trivikrama Mahārāja is one of the three
prominent disciples of Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja. He took sannyāsa from Śrīla Keśava
Mahārāja at the same time as Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and
Śrīla Vamana Mahārāja did, and since that time they have
preached together and enthused hundreds of thousands of
devotees.

2 Śrīla Narahari Dādā was a senior and intimate disciple
of Śrīla Bhaktisiddanta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He was
considered the “mother” and “Florence Nightingale” of
the Gauḍīya Maṭha. He always made arrangements for the
care and nourishment of all devotees. “Dādā” means elder
godbrother.

3 Vinoda Dādā is the brahmacārī name of Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. His full name was
Vinoda-bihārī Brahmacārī. He was manager of the Gauḍīya

                             15
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

Maṭha during the time of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura.

4 After the disappearance of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda, Śrīla Keśava Mahārāja
wanted to preach vigorously on his behalf. Śrīla
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura had previously been so pleased by
Śrīla Keśava Mahārāja’s preaching and scholarship in
scriptures that he gave him all his scriptures, and
Śrīla Keśava Mahārāja understood the meaning – that his
gurudeva wanted him to preach the real meaning of
Vedānta – as bhakti. He therefore desired to establish a
society for preaching from Vedānta, what Śrī
Gaurasundara wanted to give the world – rūpānuga-bhakti.
Therefore he started Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti.

5 Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja was the right-hand man of Śrīla
Keśava Mahārāja and he is now the ācārya of Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti, as per the will of Śrīla Keśava
Mahārāja. He is also the society’s president.




Prabhupāda's Final Order:


On Iskcon and Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

The following is a transcription, translated from a
cassette-taped Bengali conversation between Śrīla
Prabhupāda and Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. On this
cassette, made in October–November 1977, we hear from
Śrīla Prabhupāda himself about his final order in this
regard. Because the original conversation is in Bengali,
with only small parts in English, it is probably a
cassette you have never heard before.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. He will come
tomorrow?

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: He will come when we (discussing
with others). If we pick him up he might come tonight.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Hmm.

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: If we go just now with the car.
Bhakticaru is going just now with the car. Mahārāja may
come tonight.

[Someone begins to sing, “Govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ...”]

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: Should we put a little fan on? A
little bit.

[The conversation with Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja begins:]

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Srila Prabhupāda (Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Thakura) had a desire to
preach all over the world – in Europe, America and so
on. I tried my best to fulfill his desire. Now we should
preach together.


                             16
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: We have got experience that if we
endeavor collectively, there is great possibility to
spread the message of ākara matha, the mission of
Mahāprabhu, pṛthivīte āche, everywhere in the world. I
have contributed to this end to the best of my ability.

I wish that my godbrothers forgive my offenses.While
preaching, many times we say things contrary to each
other, or we cut each other’s philosophical arguments.
That happens. Please ask my godbrothers to forgive my
offenses. (inaudible)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Whatever you will order I
accept completely. I consider you my guru.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: (inaudible)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: It has been done very
beautifully. This is the proper way. It’s good that you
have raised this point – that everyone should protect
the mission of Mahāprabhu which you have established in
Western countries, by good cooperation. Though you have
taught them, still, in the future, if everyone helps
them, a wonderful movement can be established on the
Earth.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: (inaudible)...I have brought these
mlecchas and yavanas. They are like monkeys (banaras),
very expert in quarreling. Accepting those who were sent
to me by the arrangement of Kṛṣṇa, and considering their
qualifications and disqualifications, I tried educating
them, just to get things going. And they learned to
their capacity. Things can be done in good cooperation.
There is enough land, big, big temples and no shortage
of money...(inaudible)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: It’s proper for everyone to
help in this matter. Everything will be still better if
they are also humble and try to cooperate with everyone,
with each other as well as with other Vaiṣṇavas. I will
do my best to help. Whenever and whatever they will ask,
I will try my best to help them. Whenever they will call
me, any advice they will want, wherever they may want me
to go, although my qualification is limited I will try
to help to the best of my ability.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Are any of my godbrothers in Vṛndāvana
now?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Who?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Vana Mahārāja might be there,
as well as Indupati Prabhu from Caitanya Gauḍīya Maṭha.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Any more?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Only these two at the moment.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Who is Indupati?


                              17
Their Lasting Relation.txt                        5/5/2017

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Indupati. He comes here often.

Bhakticaru Swāmī: From Mādhava Mahārāja’s Maṭha?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes. No one else is here.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Please call both of them. Vana
Mahārāja and him.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: This is very good proposal by
you.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Please sit down. They will call them.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: All right.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: This cutting of arguments happens
sometimes...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: These are insignificant matters
in such a substantial worldwide mission. A little
something here and there is of no consequence. You have
done this wonderful preaching work for the benefit of
the whole world. There was no self-interest. You did
everything only in devotional service to Kṛṣṇa – for
benefitting all people at large.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: It is all by your blessings.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: You have done a wonderful
thing. It is necessary to care for and preserve this
mission, and to see that it is managed skillfully.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Kindly instruct them in this matter.
I’m unable to speak.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes. Please take rest.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Please sit a little longer.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes. I’m here.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Your health is all right?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes. You please keep
remembering Krsna. These are all very qualified men.
They will manage nicely.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: There is some problem (disturbance) in
Māyāpura.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: That will all be worked out.
The guṇḍās have done that for their selfish motives.
Everything will be all right. Some obstacles are always
there in any work.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Twenty thousand people gathered for
the meeting. Have you heard anything about it?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes, I have heard something. It
was painful. The Communist Party people have done that
nonsense. They have done utmost injustice. But now be
free to peacefully remember Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Their
sweet pastimes. Your people will take care of the

                             18
Their Lasting Relation.txt                        5/5/2017

necessities. All will be well by the wish of the Supreme
Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. No need to think about it at all.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Hmm.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Don’t worry.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: You have some affection for me? [This
is an Indian expression of love.]

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Affection! What to speak of
affection, I regard you as my guru.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: I know that. That’s why I beg you to
please forgive my offenses.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: You kindly forgive our
offenses, so that our intelligence may be fixed at the
lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Please give us this blessing.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Where is...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: He has gone to Bengal.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: When did he go?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: He went about a month ago.
Śeṣaśāyī has come with me to take your darśana. He has
rendered some services to you.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Brahmacārī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes, Śeṣaśāyī Brahmacārī.
Sometimes he has cooked for you.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Where is Tamāla?

Devotee: He is just coming, Śrīla Prabhupāda. He is in
the other room.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: (inaudible)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes, I can see that. It is very
good that you have returned to Vraja from overseas.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: They wanted to keep me there, but I
said, “No.” My health is not fit for any more travel...

[Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī enters the room.]

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Have you consulted with Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja?

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: Yes. This morning. Bhakticaru
Swāmī, Bhaktiprema Swāmī and Śrīdhara Swāmī went to see
him, and Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja described the ceremony.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: I have told them everything
needed to be done. I told them, “Whenever you need me,
I’ll come here.”

Śrīla Prabhupāda: (inaudible)...When you enter the gate
on the right side?


                             19
Their Lasting Relation.txt                        5/5/2017

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: On the entrance on the left side.
On entering, looking towards the deities. In other
words, when you come into the temple. There is a big
open...

Śrīla Prabhupāda: You must put salt around the body.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: I have explained everything to
them.

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: It’s on the same side as the
vyāsāsana.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Flowers should be placed in Māyāpura.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: I have told them to keep some
flowers, and wherever you desire those can be...

Śrīla Prabhupāda: You will be there.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes, I’ll be there.

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: He described the entire ceremony
in detail, Śrīla Prabhupāda.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: (inaudible) Has Śeṣaśāyī taken
sannyāsa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: No. He is still a brahmacārī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: All of your duties are
completed. You have fulfilled everything in your
lifetime. There is no need to worry about anything. Only
remember the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: By Their blessings only.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes, you have done everything.
Nothing is left unfinished.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Hm.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Only one thing. They should be
told not to fight with each other for self-interest.
They should work in cooperation to spread your mission.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Don’t fight among yourselves. I have
given you my will. Execute that...Today is Ekādaśī?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes, today is Ekādaśī.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: How is the service of Mahāprabhu going
on?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Hmm.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Of Jhansi. Now He is at your place.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes, your Mahāprabhu is with
me. His service is going on nicely with great affection.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: At first I was trying to do something
in Jhansi, but Kṛṣṇa had bigger plans. Now we have got
so many places.

                             20
Their Lasting Relation.txt                      5/5/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Why should you be confined to
Jhansi? Kṛṣṇa wanted you to preach everywhere.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: I wanted to live like a niṣkiñcana
Vaisnava in Vṛndāvana; but Kṛṣṇa inspired me to go out
and preach at the age of seventy with only forty rupees
in my pocket. And then it took a grand shape.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes, you have received the
special mercy of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, and also that of Śrī
Rādhā-Dāmodara.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: (inaudible)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Do you have any pain in the
body?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: It’s so so. (inaudible)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: (speaks to the devotees:) Give
him caraṇāmṛta when he feels thirsty. Also, keep some
tulasī leaves under his head.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Yei bhaje sei baḍo. [This is an
excerpt from a verse from Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta:] “One
who worships Kṛṣṇa is exalted.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Hmm. Sei baḍo. “He is exalted.”

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Abhakta hīna chāra. “One who is a non-
devotee is low-class and abominable.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: chāra. “Abominable.”

Śrīla Prabhupāda: (inaudible)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: They are fortunate. If one has
single-pointed devotion to Lord Hari, then, even if he
has any fault, api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-
bhāk / sādhur eva sa mantavyah samyag vyavasito hi saḥ.
This is the principle.

[Indupati Prabhu enters in the room.]

Indupati Prabhu: Hare Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Please come. Has Vana Mahārāja
also come?

Indupati Prabhu: (inaudible)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Indupati Prabhu has come.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has called you on my
request. I was saying to Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja that I beg
forgiveness from you....

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: (speaking softly to Indupati
Prabhu) Mahārāja is having difficulty in speaking. I’ll
tell you.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: I beg forgiveness for my offenses. I
did not wish to offend anyone. While preaching sometimes

                             21
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

we cut each other’s arguments...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: (softly explaining Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s desire to Indupati Prabhu)

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Will you forgive me?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: (to Indupati Prabhu) Will you?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: (to Śrīla Prabhupāda) Mahārāja,
you have not committed any offense. Please be merciful
to us. You haven’t committed any offense.

Indupati Prabhu: (inaudible)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: If anyone considers that you
have committed an offense, he himself is at fault.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Hmm...?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: (speaking softly to Indupati
Prabhu about Śrīla Prabhupāda) He has just returned from
London.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: They had arranged the world tour
program, but I had to return...

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: I will speak about your wish to
those disciples of Śrīla Prabhupāda (Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Thakura) who are not here. Everyone should try
to help and give them (your disciples) the needed
guidance, so they can manage nicely. Please do not worry
about anything. Remember only the lotus feet of Śrī
Rādhā- Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Please guide them in arranging the
festival properly and giving appropriate donations to
the gosvāmīs.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: (to Bhakticaru Svāmī) Have you
understood what he is saying?

Bhakticaru Swāmī: Yes. (softly speaks with Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: I have a special request.
Please do not worry about these matters anymore. They
are qualified, and they know your desires. Now only
think about Kṛṣṇa. Everything will be taken care of. You
have made the whole world dance in kṛṣṇa-nāma. Now I’ll
take leave.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: First take some prasāda.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: Yes, I’ll take.

Bhakticaru Svāmī: Śrīla Prabhupāda, I’m arranging that.

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja leaves.]

[Credit for the translation is due mostly to the efforts
of Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Puṇḍarīka dāsa
Brahmacārī, Śrīpāda Kṛṣṇa-kaṇṭī dasa Brahmacārī, and
Śrīpāda Tanmoy Chakravarty. Although the volume of the

                             22
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

original cassette was improved by digital technology for
the ease of the translators, still some parts remained
inaudible, and they are labeled as such in the above
transcription.]




Because of His Divine Grace


The following is an excerpt from a lecture spoken by
Srila Narayana Maharaja in Badger, California.

Not only here, but wherever I go throughout the world,
whether in the East or the West, I see the result of the
inspiration he has given. In a very remote place in
Canada, in a deep forest in the mountains, I went to a
devotee village named Śaraṇāgati; and I was so pleased
to see the many devotees there following varṇāśrama-
dharma and the principles of bhakti. I also went to a
remote village in Australia, also among the hills, in a
very beautiful setting. It often rained there, and it
was always vasanta, springtime. Although this place is
so far away from India, I saw that by Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja’s grace, by his preaching, a very large devotee
village had been established. Everyone there was so
inspired: women, men, old persons, and very little boys
and girls. All were wearing tilaka and neck beads – and
everyone was dancing, chanting, and remembering in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.

Even in India we don’t generally see such exhibition of
enthusiastic energy. But here I am seeing this
everywhere, and this is the miracle of Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja. Without actually coming to these places and
personally seeing what he has done, it would be
difficult to imagine.

We should understand that backing Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja
is his guru-varga, the disciplic succession – Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrīla Svarūpa
Dāmodara, Śrīla Rāya Rāmānanda and Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Acting as their hands, their instrument,
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja did not come here to propagate his
own independent mission. He came to spread the mission
of his beloved Radha-Kṛṣṇa and Gaura-Nityananda, and
particularly the mission of Śrīla Svarupa Damodara,
Śrīla Rāya Rāmānanda and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Who is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu? Anarpita-carīṁ carat
karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau. After a very long period, after
one complete day of Brahma, which comprises 1000 Kali-
yuga cycles, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared. He is
Kṛṣṇa Himself, but enriched with the beauty and mood of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa. He is rasarāja-mahābhāva.
Perhaps you have heard this name before. It contains a
very special and esoteric description of the form of
Śacīnandana Gaurahari, as given in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta.

Lord Caitanya advented in Māyāpura, Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma,

                              23
Their Lasting Relation.txt                       5/5/2017

only to give a most confidential and hidden treasure.
Even for greatly exalted devotees such as Sanaka,
Sananda, Sanatana and Sanat-kumara, for Prahlāda
Mahārāja, and even for Narada and Uddhava, this treasure
is very mysterious. Lord Caitanya came to distribute
this with His own two hands – not only with two hands,
but with hundreds of thousands of hands. In other words,
all the pure devotees of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu were
His hands.

The Lord’s associates did not consider anyone’s
qualification, and even tigers, bears, serpents,
creepers and trees became blessed. Whoever saw the
lovely appearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and
whoever heard Him calling, “O Kṛṣṇa, where are You?
Where are You?” became devotees. They began to sing and
weep, and they received kṛṣṇa-prema. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has descended to this world particularly to
give this prema. He did not only come to establish the
yuga-dharma, or to simply act as bhakta-rakṣa,
protecting His devotees from demons. The primary purpose
of His advent was to establish this:

anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ

May the Supreme Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacī-devī, be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the Age of Kali by His
causeless mercy, to bestow what no incarnation has ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant mellow of
devotional service, the mellow of conjugal love. [Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.4)]

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has come only for unnatojjvala-
rasa. What is this unnatojjvala-rasa? It is the gopīs’
mood of service to Kṛṣṇa, and particularly it is the
mood of Śrīmatī Rādhika. Don’t think that the use of the
word gopī is sahajiyism. If this were the case, then
Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja (the author of Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta), Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī (the author of this
śloka), and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu (the embodiment of
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta) would all be sahajiyas; because
this verse is the maṅgalācaraṇa (invocation) and main
verse of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.

Unnatojjvala-rasa is of two kinds: the mood of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and gopīs like Lalitā,Viśākhā, Citra, etc., and
also the mood of the pālyadāsīs, the maidservants of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Her pālyadāsīs do not want to serve
Kṛṣṇa if He is without Rādhikā. If Kṛṣṇa, alone, is
calling them, they will not go to Him; and they do not
want to personally taste Him in any way. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has come to distribute the mood of these
maidservants, like Rūpa Mañjarī and Lavanga Mañjarī, in
their service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīmatī Rādhika’s mood cannot be given; it is Hers

                             24
Their Lasting Relation.txt                      5/5/2017

exclusively. As Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Kṛṣṇa fully
tasted Her three moods:

śrī-rādhāyāḥ praṇaya-mahimā kīdṛśo vānayaivā-

svādyo yenādbhuta-madhurimā kīdṛśo vā madīyaḥ

saukhyaṁ cāsyā mad-anubhavataḥ kīdṛśaṁ veti lobhāt

tad-bhāvāḍhyaḥ samajani śacī-garbha-sindhau harīnduḥ

Desiring to understand the glory of Rādhārāṇī’s love,
the wonderful qualities in Him that She alone relishes
through Her love, and the happiness She feels when She
realizes the sweetness of His love, the Supreme Lord
Hari, richly endowed with Her emotions, appeared from
the womb of Śrīmatī Śacī-devī, as the moon appeared from
the ocean. [Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.6)]

The pleasure that Śrīmatī Rādhika experiences in serving
and seeing Kṛṣṇa cannot be given to anyone, but the mood
of the maidservant gopīs can be given. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has therefore come only to give this. Prior
to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s appearance, Śrī
Rāmānujācārya, Śrī Madhvācārya and so many other
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas had already appeared. Incarnations like
Lord Rāma and Lord Nṛsiṁha had also descended. All of
Them gave a very special contribution to the world, but
none of them gave this prema, called bhakti-rasa, which
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave through Śrīla-Rūpa Gosvāmī.

śrī-caitanya-mano-’bhīṣṭaṁ

sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ

dadāti sva-padāntikam

When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has
established within this material world the mission to
fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter
under his lotus feet?




Mahā-Viṣṇu or Mahāprabhu?


All the ācāryas in the Gauḍīya sampradāya – beginning
from Mādhavendra Purīpāda and Īśvara Purīpāda, down to
Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara, and from them down to Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja – have not come only to establish vaidhī-
bhakti. Rather, they have preached about Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s descending to distribute that prema, that
vraja-bhakti, vraja-rasa. If they were preaching only
vaidhī-bhakti, they would have been representing the
Śrī-sampradāya, Madva-sampradāya, Viṣṇusvāmī-sampradāya,
Nimbāditya, or any other sampradāya.


                             25
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

Śrīman Mahāprabhu also established the yuga-dharma
through nāma-saṅkīrtana. He did this through the medium
of Mahā-Viṣṇu, Nārāyaṇa, Nṛsiṁhadeva, and the other
avatāras, who were all contained within Himself – within
His own body. Because all the avatāras were within Him,
no other incarnation was required to perform the
function of establishing the yuga-dharma and giving
mercy to Jagāi and Mādhāi. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu did
all this Himself.

He fulfilled the wish of Advaita Ācārya that He appear
very soon. He preached and gave kṛṣṇa-prema through the
chanting of the holy name. He tasted the moods of
Śrīmatī Rādhika, and He fulfilled all His other
purposes. Among all His purposes however, two were
prominent, as described in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta – to
give kṛṣṇa-prema and to taste the moods of Śrīmatī
Rādhika.

prema-rasa-niryāsa karite āsvādana

rāga-mārga bhakti loke karite pracāraṇa

rasika-śekhara kṛṣṇa parama-karuṇa

ei dui hetu haite icchāra udgama

The Lord’s desire to appear was born from two reasons:
the Lord wanted to taste the sweet essence of the
mellows of love of God, and He wanted to propagate
devotional service in the world on the platform of
spontaneous attraction. Thus He is known as supremely
jubilant and as the most merciful of all. [Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.15–16)]

Kṛṣṇa is rasika-śekhara. Do you know the meaning of
rasika-śekhara ? He is the taster, the enjoyer, of all
rasas. He is the ocean of prema-rasa. Lord Rama has some
rasa, but He is not an unlimited ocean of rasa. Lord
Nṛsiṁhadeva has one rasa. When He appeared, He was
raudra, angry, and the entire world was fearful. But
Kṛṣṇa is rasika-śekhara, an endless ocean of rasa, and
there is no limit to the depth of that ocean.

In a general sense, all scriptures glorify Kṛṣṇa in this
way. However, according to Gauḍīya siddhānta (the
disciplic succession coming from Lord Caitanya), Śrīmatī
Rādhikā is a greater ocean of rasa than Kṛṣṇa. If He
were to dive into that ocean, He Himself would not be
able to fathom its depth.

Actually, the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was only presented for
the purpose of glorifying Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs.
So many Purāṇas and other literatures were previously
written to glorify Kṛṣṇa. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
glorifying Kṛṣṇa is not the supreme objective; rather it
is to glorify the prema of the vraja-bhaktas.

Kṛṣṇa is not the object of life. Kṛṣṇa-prema is our
object. Kaṁsa also had darśana of Kṛṣṇa, but he had no
prema and therefore he could not satisfy or serve Kṛṣṇa.
In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta it has been revealed that
kṛṣṇa-prema is the supreme goal of all jīvas, and that
rādhā-prema is the supermost prema. Kṛṣṇa, as Śrī

                             26
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

Caitanya Mahāprabhu, came only to taste that prema, and
to give the moods of Rūpa Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī and all
the pālyadāsīs of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

The jīva cannot possess the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He
cannot digest more than the mood of pālyadāsīs – but
that mood is the highest position. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and all the Gosvāmīs were
absorbed in this internal mood of a servant of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, and all the
Six Gosvāmīs chanted and rolled on the ground in
Vṛndāvana – sometimes in Rādhā-kuṇḍa or Śyāma-kuṇḍa,
sometimes in Vṛndāvana or Bandhiravana, and sometimes in
Nandāgaoṅ or Varṣāṇā. They were weeping profusely and
calling out everywhere, “O Rādhikā, where are you?” With
very deep feelings, they daily chanted not less than one
lākha of harināma. They were absorbed in thinking of
Kṛṣṇa’s names and pastimes, and they were offering
hundreds of thousands of daṇḍavat-praṇāmas. They prayed:
“O Rādhā! O Rādhā! O Kṛṣṇa! Karuṇā-sindhu! Dīna-bandhu!
Jagat-pate!”

All of our ācāryas are rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas. They have not
come to preach vaidhī-bhakti. They did so, however, in
order to first cut the jungles of philosophical
misconceptions, then to establish the yuga-dharma, and
then to give these deeper conceptions. Without having
done this preliminary work, no one would be able to
understand.




The Essence of All Advice


Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī states:

tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

The essence of all advice is that one should utilize
one’s full time – twenty-four hours a day – in nicely
chanting and remembering the Lord’s divine name,
transcendental form, qualities and eternal pastimes,
thereby gradually engaging one’s tongue and mind. In
this way one should reside in Vraja [Goloka Vṛndāvana-
dhāma] and serve Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of devotees.
One should follow in the footsteps of the Lord’s beloved
devotees, who are deeply attached to His devotional
service. [Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 8]

You should read Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s splendid
explanation of this śloka. He writes that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has descended to this world only to
distribute kṛṣṇa-prema. If you want this prema, you must

                             27
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

follow the principles of this śloka. Here, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī has briefly given the sum and substance of the
teachings of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

If you want kṛṣṇa-prema, then chant the names of Kṛṣṇa.
And what are the best names? The best names are those in
relation to tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi janānugāmī – Kṛṣṇa
in Vṛndāvana, in relation to His dearmost devotees
there.

he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho

dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopīkā-kānta

rādhā-kānta namo ’stu te

O my dear Kṛṣṇa, You are an ocean of mercy. You are the
friend of the distressed and the source of creation. You
are the master of the gopas. You are the lover of the
gopīs. You are the beloved of Rādhārāṇī. I offer my
respectful obeisances unto You.

The author is praying, “O Kṛṣṇa, You are very kind,
merciful, charming and beautiful. I beg you to bestow
your mercy.” If one is very dīna-hīna, humble, then the
Lord’s mercy can be obtained – otherwise not. Rain falls
on the top of a hill, but it does not remain there. It
eventually collects in a pit or a valley. The pit
represents the humble devotee, and the rainfall
represents Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. If we are not humble, then
although mercy is always everywhere, we cannot gather
it. The author therefore says: “dīna-bandho! I am not
qualified or humble, but you have so much mercy for
everyone. Dīna means fallen and I am certainly one of
the fallen souls. I have so much false ego, however,
that I don’t consider myself a wretched person. Jagat-
pate. I am in this world, but you are jagat-pate, master
of the entire universe. You nourish and support everyone
in the universe, and I am one of those you support.”

The above names are names of Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, and now the
author calls out to Kṛṣṇa of Vṛndāvana. He says “O
Gopeśa, You are the Lord of the gopas and gopīs of
Vṛndāvana, Vraja – but I am not among them.” He wants to
be among them, and therefore he now prays, “You are also
the dearly beloved of the gopīs.” This name is more
prominent, but the most prominent name is the final name
of the prayer, Rādhā-kānta. Rādhā-kānta means that Kṛṣṇa
is controlled by Rādhā. So we should chant these names
and remember the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa connected with them.

If you chant the name Dāmodara, what will you remember?
Yaśodā-maiyā is binding Kṛṣṇa to the the grinding
mortar, and He is weeping because she is chastising and
controlling Him. But there is also another Dāmodara –
Rādhā-Dāmodara, or Kṛṣṇa who is controlled by Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. One can remember how Śrīmatī Yaśodā controls
Kṛṣṇa, or how Śrīmatī Rādhikā controls Him.

It is better to live only in Vṛndāvana, where these
pastimes were performed; and if you cannot live there,
then be there by mind. That alone is not sufficient,

                             28
Their Lasting Relation.txt                     5/5/2017

however, for Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī gives still another
rule. We will have to be under the guidance of a rasikā
tattva-jña Vaiṣṇava, that is, under the guidance of
fully realized souls like Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and his
rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava followers who have complete knowledge
of śāstra and who experience their loving relationship
(rasa) with Kṛṣṇa. Otherwise, it is not possible to
advance on this path.




Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Glory


Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja has come to give
these elevated principles through the holy name. For
less qualified persons he also gave vaidhī-bhakti
through the name, but his innermost mood was to give
this kind of kṛṣṇa-prema.

As I explained in Vṛndāvana, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was
not in the line of Advaita Ācārya, Mahā-Viṣṇu, who comes
in each Kali-yuga to establish the yuga-dharma of the
general chanting of nāma (which only awards the chanter
vaikuntha-prema). Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu established
nāma with vraja-prema, and this was His speciality. It
was also the speciality of parama-pūjyapāda Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja, so I have glorified him by establishing that
he has come in the line of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Just as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu did,
he has also established yuga-dharma, and he was a
rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava, a follower of Rūpa Gosvāmī, Rūpa
Mañjarī.

Although I explained this previously, some devotees
could not understand. They told me: “Oh, you are not
glorifying our gurudeva.” But he is my gurudeva also,
not only yours. I have shared my love for him with you,
only to sprinkle more mercy upon you. He has given me a
special opportunity to serve him, and I am therefore
offering my heartfelt puṣpāñjali at his lotus feet here.

You should try to obey all of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s
principles, and try to have the same internal mood and
objective as he has – vraja-prema, or gopī-prema. This
is our goal. You should begin from the very preliminary
stages, and ultimately give up all material desires to
please Kṛṣṇa. I offer my daṇḍavat-praṇāmas to His Divine
Grace Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja.



Table of Contents

A Brief History

My Mission in the West

A Locked Treasure Chest

The Divine Disappearance of Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī

                             29
Their Lasting Relation.txt         5/5/2017


Letter of Condolence

Prabhupāda's Final Order:

Because of His Divine Grace

Mahā-Viṣṇu or Mahāprabhu?

The Essence of All Advice

Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Glory




                              30
