To Be Controlled By Love.txt                     5/5/2017

TO BE CONTROLLED BY LOVE



Contents:

THERE IS NO HAPPINESS IN THIS WORLD

THE MOST VALID AUTHORITY

THE TWO KINDS OF SOULS IN THIS WORLD

“O KRISHNA! I AM YOURS!“

REAL GOOD FORTUNE

KRISHNA ARRANGES FOR US TO HAVE A GURU

TWO TYPES OF DISCIPLE

WHAT IS MAYA? WHAT IS BHAKTI?

THE GURU DESTROYS SIN

HOW TO APPROACH GURUDEVA

QUALIFICATIONS OF THE GURU

THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE INTERMEDIATE DEVOTEE

WE ARE CONTROLLED BY MAYA

WHERE IT IS BLISSFUL TO BE CONTROLLED

THE SLAP OF LOVE AND AFFECTION

“I WILL TAKE ALL YOUR LOVE AND AFFECTION“

KRISHNA BECOMES VICTORIOUS IN DEFEAT

THERE ARE NO LIARS IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD!

DEVOTIONAL SURRENDER

A SPECIAL TYPE OF FAITH

THE SYMPTOMS OF SURRENDER

IT IS SO BLISSFUL TO SERVE SRI GURUDEVA

CHANT HARE KRISHNA!




THERE IS NO HAPPINESS IN THIS WORLD


You know that everyone wants to be happy. All living
entities want happiness, but this world is arranged so
that no one will ever be happy here. We cannot be happy.
You should realise that there is no happiness and no
tranquillity in this world.

                             1
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                   5/5/2017


Even if a man is wealthy and has all facility for
happiness, still some problem or dangerous sickness will
disturb him. We may not be weak while we are young, but
many diseases appear as we get older. Even if one has no
diseases, there are many other problems. His wife may
become sick; another relative or a friend may have
cancer or tuberculosis; and someone else has another
disease or some other problem.

This world is arranged so that we always have a rope
around our neck, and at some point it starts to tighten.
This is because we have forgotten Krishna. As long as we
are not endeavouring for Krishna consciousness, we will
be more and more unhappy, with more problems, for many
lifetimes. This is the truth, hut we can only understand
all this by the grace of the disciplic succession. That
is called Vedic authority.




THE MOST VALID AUTHORITY


Whom can we believe regarding what is good and what is
bad? We must have some authority who is very kind and
selfless, and in whom we can believe. The Vedic
literatures such as the Vedas, Upanisads and Srimad-
Bhagavatam are like that, but they cannot speak directly
to us. They can only speak directly to great souls who
are on a higher platform than we are, to personalities
like Vyasa, Sukadeva Gosvami, Valmiki and Parasara. If
we attend their classes and hear something from them,
and if we read under their guidance, then we can
understand something. But if we read Srimad-Bhagavatam
by ourselves, we may be troubled by lust and ignorance.

The great sages who first spoke Srimad-Bhagavatam have
set this example. They only instructed their disciples
after they themselves had heard and realised what they
were teaching. After that, they could speak Srimad-
Bhagavatam with realisation; the Bhagavatam inspired
them. We should try to follow their example, so that we
can have firm faith in scrip-tures such as the Vedas,
the Upanisads, Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam.

The deep truths contained within these scriptures have
been handed down since time immemorial through an
unbroken disciplic succession, which began with Lord
Brahma, the secondary creator of this universe. In
modern times, it was continued by Srila Bhaktisiddhanta
Sarasvati Thakura, and after that by his disciples, such
as our Gurudeva and Srila Bhaktivedanta Swami Maharaja.
We can realise something especially if we study the
scriptures that have been accepted by this disciplic
succession.

The scriptures have stated conclusively that, Krishna
(also known as Hari) is the Supreme Absolute Truth. In
other words, Krishna is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He is the ocean of transcendental mellows and
relationships, and He possesses all kinds of powers and

                           2
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                     5/5/2017

potencies in full. He is also very merciful, and He is
the source and basis of our very existence.




THE TWO KINDS OF SOULS IN THIS WORLD


We — that is, all living beings in every species of life
— are all spirit souls. There are two categories of
souls: liberated souls and conditioned souls. The
liberated souls never forget Krishna. They are always
serving Him with love and affection, and they do not
even know what this material world is. But
unfortunately, we conditioned souls have forgotten
Krishna. That is why He has sent us to this world, where
we are covered by the illusory energy, maya. Maya says,
“Oh, you want to imitate Krishna, and try to taste this
world and enjoy it? And that is why you have forgotten
Him? Then I will help you. I will give you all kinds of
wealth, husbands and wives, brothers, sisters and so
many things. You can become attached to them and forget
Him more and more.“ Then we become attached to these
things, and that attachment becomes the cause of so much
suffering. We should know that our attachment, love and
affection in this world is all a perverted reflection of
our original love for Krishna.

As conditioned souls in the material world, we are
thinking, “1 have so many possessions which belong to
me, and I am the doer of so many activities. I am a
father; I am a mother; I am a husband; I am a wife; I am
a son; I am a daughter; I am a king.“’ In this way, we
create many false identities for ourselves.

By the influence of the witch of maya, sometimes we go
up, and sometimes we come down. She has created so many
diseases and problems to plague us. We must be clear on
this one point: whatever our position in life, we will
have problems. One may be Hitler or Mussolini, or a very
poor person, or somewhere in between, but in any case he
will have problems, because there are problems
everywhere. Everywhere.




“O KRISHNA! I AM YOURS!“


Sri Caitanya-caritamrta describes the material
sufferings of the living entity, and how these
sufferings come to an end.

“When the conditioned soul becomes averse to Krishna, he
is swept away in the current of birth and death in
material existence. He wanders aimlessly throughout the
8,400,000 species of life, being burnt by the three-fold
miseries. It is extremely difficult to attain
deliverance from this current. However, just as a piece
of wood floating in a river may be washed up on the bank

                           3
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                   5/5/2017

by the strong current, similarly a conditioned soul by
extreme good fortune may attain the shelter of the
association of pure devotees. Then he may be released
from the current of material existence, and may again be
established in his own constitutional position as the
servant of Krishna.”

“When, by the association of sadhus, a person awakens
his loving attachment to Sri Krishna’s lotus feet, it is
a sign that by good fortune he will soon be released
from material existence. That is why all the scriptures
glorify the association of sadhus so abundantly. They
state that it is not at all easy to attain even a
moment’s association with a sadhu. But if any
conditioned soul feels extreme anguish, and just once
calls out to Krishna from the core of his heart, ‘O
Krishna! I am Yours!’ then Krishna gives him the
association of sadhus, and takes him beyond the bondage
of maya [illusion].“




REAL GOOD FORTUNE


When someone begins to associate with sadhus, it is a
sign that, by exceedingly good fortune, his material
existence is about to come to an end. We should
understand very well what this good fortune is. The
fortune of the conditioned soul is simply the fruit of
his previous activities. There are two types of
activity: material activities, which give rise to
material fortune and gain, and transcendental activities
which give rise to spiritual fortune and gain.
Activities such as serving sadhus, Sri Krishna or His
holy name, are transcendental when they are performed
for the sake of acquiring spiritual wealth. No matter
what else the conditioned soul may do, knowingly or
unknowingly if he performs transcendental activities,
their effects accumulate to create a type of impression
within the heart which gradually takes the form of
desire for devotional service to Krishna (bhakti). When
this impression becomes well nourished, it is called
good fortune, and by its influence, the conditioned
soul’s materialistic desires gradually begin to weaken.
When desires in relation to material existence are very
much diminished, and when the impression of good fortune
has been nourished extensively, then faith in the
association of sadhus arises. This same faith easily
leads to repeated association with sadhus, and that is
the cause of attaining complete perfection.




KRISHNA ARRANGES FOR US TO HAVE A GURU


Krishna will arrange a guru when one surrenders
sincerely, without desire for material gain. So we
should come to that stage, and then we can easily

                           4
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                   5/5/2017

receive the mercy of that rare guru. Everything depends
on Krishna.

A bona fide guru is very rare in this world, and the
scriptures explain that a bona fide disciple who
surrenders fully is even more rare. We have heard about
Arjuna’s surrender to Krishna in Bhagavad-gita. The
Vedas, Upanisads and Puranas cite many other examples of
the ideal guru and the ideal disciple, but the most
exalted example is that of Srila Jiva Goswami, and his
full surrender to the lotus feet of Sri Rupa and Srila
Sanatana Gosvamis. Now we may ask, who is the guru of
Srila Sanatana Gosvami and Srila Rupa Gosvami? Srila
Rupa Gosvami has prayed to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in
the auspicious invocation of each of his books. Caitanya
Mahaprabhu is a historical personality who appeared some
500 years ago. Yet we understand from scriptural
authority that He is Sri Krishna Himself, and that He
has come as His own devotee to teach us by His own
example how to practise devotional service. Sri Rupa and
Sanatana Gosvamis were His personal associates and
direct disciples. But when did Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
initiate Sri Rupa and Sanatana? Have we heard of a fire
sacrifice being performed for their initia-tion, and
mantras being given to them? No. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
instilled everything in their hearts, and they accepted
Him as guru within their hearts. This is most important—
to follow Gurudeva internally and externally.

If we offer our heart very naturally at a Vaisnava’s
lotus feet, he is our guru, regardless of whether or not
he gives mantras and performs a fire sacrifice. These
activities are external, and they are not as important
as the internal process of surrendering one’s heart.




TWO TYPES OF DISCIPLE


There are two types of disciples, and consequently two
kinds of initiation. The first type is formal
initiation, which includes the external formality of the
fire sacrifice and the giving of gayatri mantras. One
may think, “Now I am initiated, because I have
sacrificed so much, I have shaved my head, and I have
received my mantras,“ but this is external. Of course,
formal initiation is essential, but it is not complete
without internal initiation.

Internal initiation is the process whereby the disciple
dedicates his heart at his guru’s lotus feet, knowing
that the guru will give him the qualification to serve
Sri Sri Radha and Krishna. Sri Gurudeva gives all kinds
of transcendental knowledge of the fundamental truths
about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, guru, the
devotees, and transcendental love of Godhead.




                           5
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                    5/5/2017

WHAT IS MAYA? WHAT IS BHAKTI?


The guru also teaches what is maya. He explains that it
is the spell of the illusory energy that makes us see a
man or a woman as a source of our sense gratification.
Such consciousness has created many problems between
husband and wife, especially in Western countries. Many
people get married and are divorced several times, and
there is no concern for the children. Marriage actually
means that husband and wife should be together for life,
and they should not allow small problems to be a cause
of divorce. The guru will teach his followers that they
should not be too attached or detached. Rather, they
should perform their duty, and they should see
themselves, their wives and their children as Krishna’s
servants. He will teach them to perform their duties in
such a way that they develop their Krishna
consciousness.

The guru instructs us how to practise devotion [bhakti],
and how to develop our honour, affection and service for
Krishna. This is transcendental knowledge. Gurudeva also
destroys our sinful reactions: “As a result of receiving
diksa, one gradually becomes disinterested in material
enjoyment, and becomes interested in spiritual life.“
(Bhakti-sandarbha, 283)




THE GURU DESTROYS SIN


Kuryat papasya sanksayam: “Material life consists of the
problems arising from our attachment to worldly
affairs.“ In material life one is full of lust, anger,
greed, pride, illusion and envy, and he thinks that he
is the enjoyer.

Sri Gurudeva destroys the four stages of sin:

1. Karma that has already fructified. This is the
suffering

and enjoyment that comes to us now, as a result of
activities that we committed in the past.

2. The seeds of sinful desire dormant within the heart,
which will eventually cause us to perform sinful
activity when they mature.

3. Future reactions. The reactions of our present
activities that will fructify in the future.

4. Ignorance whereby one forgets Krishna and thinks
himself to be the enjoyer. This ignorance is the
fundamental cause of all problems.



If one’s initiating guru is not advanced enough to
vanquish these four stages of sin, one cannot make

                           6
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                   5/5/2017

steady progress in devotional service. In that case, one
should accept an instructing guru who is more ad vanced.
Pray to Krishna and Gurudeva to help you to solve your
difficulties. A bona fide guru will advise you to seek
the shelter of advanced Vaisnavas, who are of the
calibre of Srila Rupa Goswami and Srila Narottama dasa
Thakura.

If the guru shows jealousy or envy when his disciples
associate with a more advanced instructing guru, or if
he is opposed to Vaisnavas and their teachings, then the
disciple should consider giving him up. Otherwise, one
should not give up one’s initiating spiritual master,
even if one finds an instructing spiritual master who is
more advanced.

Nowadays, people leave one guru and take another, just
as modern husbands and wives divorce each other very
easily.

But if we want to be successful in devotional service,
we must become faithful and steady. “Even if anyone cuts
me into pieces, I cannot give up chanting Hare Krishna“
— we should have this strong faith in the holy name. If
we have such strong faith in chanting, we will not
readily change guru, because we cannot attain devotional
service to Sri Krishna by doing so. Our faith in our
guru and his words should be high class, and not bogus.




HOW TO APPROACH GURUDEVA


If you are sincere, Krishna will arrange to send you a
very good guru who is qualified in all respects, so you
should always pray to Krishna to give you a qualified
guru. This is the external symptom of faith. You should
have strong faith in the statements of guru, Krishna and
the scriptures. Bhagavad-gita explains how we should
approach a spiritual master.

tad viddhi pranipatena pariprasnena sevaya upadeksyanti
te jnanam jnaninas tattva darsinah

“Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual
master. Inquire from him submissively and render service
unto him. The self-realised souls can impart knowledge
unto you because they have seen the truth.“ (Bhagavad-
gita 4.34).

We should go to those who have realised this Absolute
Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and we should
offer obeisances (pranams) to them. What is pranam? “Oh,
I offer my pranam to you.“ Real pranam is not merely an
external activity of that sort. Pranam means that I am
offering my whole self with all my knowledge and
everything at the lotus feet of my Gurudeva. In other
words, I am surrendering to him. This is pranam:
“Whatever you instruct me to do, I must follow.“

We must serve the guru and please him, and then make

                           7
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                   5/5/2017

inquiries from him in the proper fashion, very humbly.
We should examine him, because certain standards are
required both for the guru and for the disciple. It is
stated in the scriptures, tasmad gurum prapadyeta: “We
should surrender to a guru who can give good
instructions, and who can remove all our doubts.“ Such a
guru will take us to Krishna, but he must be a realised
soul. That means that he has given up sense
gratification and does not hanker for any worldly
things.




SYMPTOMS OF A GURU

If you see that a guru still desires sense
gratification, you should offer pranam and leave his
association. Specifically, what should you do if the
guru was previously a high class renunciate2s but has
become attached to some lady and has given up his
renunciation to become a householder? You should offer
prasadam and give him up as one leaves stool after
passing it.

There are symptoms that show whether the guru is
qualified or not. Of the three grades of devotee —
neophyte, intermediate and highest — the initiating guru
should not be less than an intermediate devotee. Of
course, the topmost devotee is superior, and he can
award superior results in bhakti, but such a guru is
rare in this world. In the absence of such an extremely
advanced guru, the intermediate devotee can be accepted
as an initiating or instructing guru. That means that it
is necessary to know the symptoms of an intermediate
devotee before accepting an initiating or instructing
guru.

You should not accept anyone as guru if he does not
exhibit these symptoms. Otherwise, you will have so many
difficulties in your devotional life. If your guru falls
down, you will cry bitterly, and your life will be
ruined.

The first symptom of an intermediate devotee is:

tasmad gurum prapadyeta jijnasuh sreya uttamam sabde
pare ca nisnatam brahmany upasamasrayam

“Anyone who seriously desires to achieve real happiness
must find a bona fide spiritual master and take shelter
of him by initiation. The qualification of a spiritual
master is that he must have realised the conclusion of
the scriptures by deliberation and logic, and must be
able to convince others of these conclusions. Such great
personalities, who have left aside all material
considerations and have taken complete shelter of the
Supreme Godhead, are to be accepted as bona fide
spiritual masters.“ (SrimadBhagavatam, 11.3.21)




                           8
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                     5/5/2017

QUALIFICATIONS OF THE GURU


A guru should have all of the symptoms mentioned in this
verse, but three are especially important. The first
symptom is sabde pare ca nisnatam brahmani: the guru has
complete knowledge of the scriptures. The second symptom
is upasa1nasra yam: he is detached from material
desires, and is always serving Krishna very happily. If
he is unhappy and feels that his life is full of
problems, then he is not qualified to be a guru.

Haridasa Thakura was beaten in 22 market places, almost
to the point of death, but he did not consider this a
problem. He kept chanting Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna.
Prahlada Maharaja was tortured by his father, yet he
never felt that he had a problem. On the contrary, he
stood on the head of all his problems. Suppose a guru
laments that he has many problems: his wife has cheated
him; his children are not with him; he cannot make money
and he’s not good at managing; he doesn’t have enough
material facility; and he has no computer. Such a so-
called guru should be rejected at once, even if he
chants Hare Krishna, has taken initiation, and performs
the nine processes of bhakti.

The third symptom of a guru is that he is realised in
Krishna-bhakti. If he lacks this realisation because he
still has material desires, he is bound to fall.




THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE INTERMEDIATE DEVOTEE


In addition to the three symptoms mentioned above, one
should make sure that the guru has the following four
qualities of an intermediate devotee:

1. He has love and affection for Krishna.

2. He shows friendship towards the Vaisnavas, and offers
service to them. He has three kinds of relations with
three kinds of Vaisnavas. When he meets a devotee who is
more advanced than himself in bhakti, he honours him and
obeys him, in a mood of friendship. He relates to equals
as friends, and he is also friendly to those whose
bhakti is less developed. So he has friendship (maitri)
with honour for superiors; he has friendship towards
those who are on an equal level; and he has friendship
and compassion for subordinates.

3. He shows mercy to those who are less advanced, but
who have faith in Vaisnavas (even if the faith is
worldly) and who honour them. In other words, the less
advanced devotees may have material sentiments towards
the guru and the Deity. They may have more affection for
the Deities than for the devotees, and therefore may not
like to meet with devotees and hear their hari-katha.
Such less advanced devotees may not be able to act in
the four ways that an intermediate devotee should act,
even though they under-stand that they should obey the

                             9
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                     5/5/2017

scriptures. These people may be ignorant, but they want
to learn how to advance in devotional service.

4. The intermediate devotee shows neglect towards
offenders who oppose the Vaisnavas, or who do not honour
them. He is aware that having a relationship with such
people or associating with them destroys all traces of
bhakti.



Anyone who is trying to decide whether to accept a
particular guru should examine him. Does he have the
three main symptoms of an intermediate devotee who is
qualified to be guru, and also the four above-mentioned
additional qualities? Srila Jiva Goswami warns us in
Bhakti-sandarbha that if one accepts a guru for worldly
name, fame and gain, or if a guru accepts disciples for
a similar reason, both will fall down. Their destination
will be naraka, hell.




WE ARE CONTROLLED BY MAYA


Although we have come genuinely to search for Guru,
still, in this world, it is very painful to be
controlled. We don’t want anyone else to control us.
Rather, we want to be free. However, we cannot escape
being controlled by the material energy, maya. We are
all bound to take birth and to die. We are all bound to
become old, even though we don’t want to.

When you are young, you may have a few white hairs. Then
what will you do? “Oh, pull them out.“ That’s all right,
but what will you do when most of your hair has become
white? You can’t pull it all out.

Our teeth are so beautiful when we are young, but when
we become old, they fall out. During our youth, our eyes
are so beautiful and so powerful, but as we grow old, we
are controlled by old age. We can only see with the help
of glasses, and in the end, when we are older still,
even glasses may not help us. We are bound to become
old, although we don’t want to. We are bound to die,
although we don’t want to.

We don’t want anyone to control us. Boys don’t want
their parents to control them. When they finish their
studies, they work very hard so that they can become
free. They work hard in some job and live alone, because
they don’t want to be controlled by their parents. Girls
also don’t want to get married, because they have this
conviction: “If I get married, I will be under the
control of some male person. So why should I get
married? It will be better if I stay single.“

Young men also don’t want to be controlled in   marriage.
They think, “If I get married, I will have to   support my
wife and children and look after them until I   have
become old.“ So no one in this world wants to   be

                            10
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                   5/5/2017

controlled, even by the love of his wife and children.




WHERE IT IS BLISSFUL TO BE CONTROLLED


Even though we don’t generally want to be controlled,
still, there is a place where being controlled is so
lovely and full of affection that it makes us happy. You
know that children want to be with their parents and
especially with their mother. What does the baby do when
the mother has gone here and there? He misses his mother
and cries for her. There is a place where being
controlled is so blissful that even the Supreme
Personality of Godhead wants to be controlled by love
and affection. Everybody wants to have love and affec-
tion, because it is the nature of all living entities to
feel happiness by giving and receiving love and
affection. We are like this because this quality is
fully present in the Supreme.




THE SLAP OF LOVE AND AFFECTION


It is excruciatingly painful to live under a controlling
influence in this material world. But in the spiritual
world, Vaikuntha, it is very blissful to be controlled.
In fact, we cannot even imagine how blissful it is from
our experience in this world. Why is it so blissful to
be controlled there? Because the control there is always
with love and affection. It is absolutely full of pure
love and affection.

Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but in
Goloka Vrndavana He wants to be defeated and controlled
by Srimati Radhika. And who is Radhika? She is the
embodiment of pure love and affection.

If a man is not on good terms with you yet he offers to
give you something, can you accept it? No, you cannot
because there is a lack of regard. But if someone has
love and affection for you, even if he slaps you, you
will be happy because he has the highest regard for you.
Why? Because the slap is so full of love and affection.




“I WILL TAKE ALL YOUR LOVE AND AFFECTION“


In Goloka Vrndavana, which is Krishna’s supreme abode in
the spiritual world, it is not a problem to be
controlled by others, because all there are themselves
controlled by love and affection. Even Krishna Himself,
who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, wants to be

                           11
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                   5/5/2017

controlled by love and affection there.

When people play gambling matches with each other, they
make an agreement: “If you defeat me, I shall have to
pay you something. And if I defeat you, I will take
something from you.“ Krishna and Srimati Radhika also
play games with each other like this.

Krishna said, “If I defeat You, You will have to pay me
something.“

“What is that something?“

Krishna said, “I will take Your whole love and
affection.“ Just imagine how blissful it is to defeat
someone and be defeated like that. So in that realm,
everything is blissful.




KRISHNA BECOMES VICTORIOUS IN DEFEAT


Everything is so high there in Krishnaloka, in Vaikuntha
or in Goloka Vrndavana. It is so high that we can’t
imagine from here. Krishna is defeated when He is
wrestling with his friends. According to Indian rules,
when two people are wrestling, whoever is pinned to the
ground is defeated. Krishna and Sridama were wrestling
according to these rules, and Sridama defeated Krishna.
Sridama announced that he was victorious, but Krishna
simply smiled.

“Why are You smiling?“ Sridama asked.

Krishna declared, “I have defeated you.“

Sridama became perplexed: “How have You defeated me? I
have pinned You to the earth so You are defeated. How
can you think that You have defeated me?“

Krishna explained, “No, I have defeated you because your
nose is down and My nose is up.“ Krishna is so
inspiringly witty. They are defeating one another there
because it is so blissful to be defeated. We cannot
imagine such loving exchanges from our experience in
this world. We will have to learn all this, and the
first step now is how to be controlled by Gurudeva. It
will make you blissful, and it will help you to enter
into the realm of love and affection.




THERE ARE NO LIARS IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD!


There is no love and affection at all in this world.
That is why we are always suffering intensely. But there
is nothing like that there -s there is no suffering or
anything. There is no birth, no death, and no old age or

                            12
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                   5/5/2017

disease. It is always a very beautiful place, with
nothing unpleasant or unfavourable. No one there will
lie to us or cheat us — not one. There are no lawyers or
anyone like that there. It is not like here at all.
Here, everyone wants to take, hut there is nothing to
take there — nothing. There is only giving. Everyone is
coming to us to give pure love and affection.

It begins from the fundamental principle of guru. A
disciple takes shelter of Gurudeva and Gurudeva controls
him. Every bona fide disciple wants to be controlled by
Gurudeva. Why? Because it is so very blissful to be
under Gurudeva’s control.

This control with love begins with service to Gurudeva.
A disciple gives everything to Gurudeva and Gurudeva
gives his whole transcendental wealth — that is love and
affection. To be controlled is such a high thing there.
So have faith in this and don’t be afraid.




DEVOTIONAL SURRENDER


I also used to be afraid of being controlled. I never
wanted to be controlled by anyone. But when I was
controlled by my Gurudeva, — Oh! then I changed
completely. Now I think, “I want to be controlled by my
Gurudeva. I want to be controlled by Krishna and His
friends in the spiritual world.“ I want to be controlled
by them. Even Krishna wants to be controlled by His
friends’ love and affection for Him. And His friends
also want to be controlled by love and affection.

You can also control Krishna by love and affection. Do
you want to control Krishna like that? But first you
must be completely controlled by love and affection. To
be controlled in this way is called ‘devotional
surrender.‘

The process of control by love and affection is
devotional surrender. The particular type of devotional
surrender that devotees practise has been described
minutely by the great teachers in our line, and it is
called




A SPECIAL TYPE OF FAITH


Saranagati is made possible by faith. In fact, it is the
first manifestation of faith. When I say ‘faith’, I am
not just talking about belief. This particular type of
faith, which we call sraddha, is a very special
condition.

Our original nature is to serve Krishna, but we have
forgotten this because of the spell of maya. When this

                           13
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                     5/5/2017

tendency or desire to serve Krishna   manifests within the
heart by Gurudeva’s grace, it shows   itself outwardly by
sraddha. This is the mood necessary   to enter the main
stream of bhakti, or transcendental   devotional service.

Saranagati, devotional surrender, takes the devotees to
the door of bhakti and then bhakti takes us to Krishna.
Bhakti is the actual process of serving Krishna with
these present senses, and it starts with hearing and
chanting His name, fame, glories, pastimes and so on.




THE SYMPTOMS OF SURRENDER


You should know what the symptoms of surrender are, so
that you will know whether or not you have faith or
saranagati to Gurudeva. There are six symptoms of a
surrendered devotee, one who is actually practising
saranagati. (1) He accepts whatever is favourable for
devotional service and (2) he rejects everything that is
unfavourable. Vie has (3) firm faith that Krishna will
always protect him, and (4) that Krishna will look after
him and maintain him, supplying all his necessities. (5)
He has dedicated himself to Krishna and he is always (6)
meek and humble. These six symptoms naturally manifest
in those who have sraddha, faith — faith in Gurudeva,
faith in the devotees, and faith in Krishna.

It is at this point that bliss begins. As the devotee
advances, there is a natural development from faith, to
firmly established devotional service, and then to
taste, transcendental attachment, loving ecstasy and at
last it develops into full transcendental love and
affection, or prema.




IT IS SO BLISSFUL TO SERVE SRI GURUDEVA


Gurudeva knows that Krishna is supplying whatever he
needs, and a thousand times more. Therefore, he does not
need any service from us. But we need to serve him,
because unless we serve Gurudeva, we cannot develop our
service to Krishna. So, Gurudeva accepts our service to
help us, and because we want to serve him. It is so
blissful to serve Gurudeva.

Recently I asked my disciple, “Why did you have to drive
me to the airport in your own car? Why couldn’t you have
sent someone else? Any of these boys could have brought
me here.“

My disciple answered, “Because I wanted to be your
driver.“

If the disciple gets so much bliss and love and
affection from serving Gurudeva, just imagine how

                            14
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                     5/5/2017

blissful it will be to serve Krishna’s lotus feet in the
spiritual realm. Service to Krishna’s lotus feet is love
and affection in that plane. To serve Krishna is the
essence of love and affection.




CHANT HARE KRISHNA!


If you want all these things, then you should chant the
mahamantra:

Hare Krishna Hare Krishna

Krishna Krishna Hare Hare

Hare Rama Hare Rama

Rama Rama Hare Hare

Then love and affection will develop naturally, and it
will fulfil all of your needs and desires —
automatically. Your life will be filled with love and
affection.

This is our preaching — take it!

Gaura premanande! Haribol!



Table of Contents

THERE IS NO HAPPINESS IN THIS WORLD

THE MOST VALID AUTHORITY

THE TWO KINDS OF SOULS IN THIS WORLD

“O KRISHNA! I AM YOURS!“

REAL GOOD FORTUNE

KRISHNA ARRANGES FOR US TO HAVE A GURU

TWO TYPES OF DISCIPLE

WHAT IS MAYA? WHAT IS BHAKTI?

THE GURU DESTROYS SIN

HOW TO APPROACH GURUDEVA

QUALIFICATIONS OF THE GURU

THE QUALIFICATIONS OF THE INTERMEDIATE DEVOTEE

WE ARE CONTROLLED BY MAYA

WHERE IT IS BLISSFUL TO BE CONTROLLED


                             15
To Be Controlled By Love.txt                 5/5/2017

THE SLAP OF LOVE AND AFFECTION

“I WILL TAKE ALL YOUR LOVE AND AFFECTION“

KRISHNA BECOMES VICTORIOUS IN DEFEAT

THERE ARE NO LIARS IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD!

DEVOTIONAL SURRENDER

A SPECIAL TYPE OF FAITH

THE SYMPTOMS OF SURRENDER

IT IS SO BLISSFUL TO SERVE SRI GURUDEVA

CHANT HARE KRISHNA!




                            16
