Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura

GVP (2011)



Tags: Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā bhaktivinoda ṭhākura
vaishnava philosophy

Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā bhaktivinoda ṭhākura vaishnava
philosophyttt



* * *




* * *




Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā



Contents

Preface

Introduction

Chapter One

Chapter Two

Chapter Three

Chapter Four

Chapter Five

Chapter Six

Chapter Seven

Chapter Eight

Chapter Nine

Chapter Ten

Śrī Hari-nāma




                              1
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017



Preface



In this modern age there has been significant
advancement in the development of science, engineering,
medicine and economics. Simultaneously, however, the
problems arising from poverty, crime, disease, and
climatic irregularities are constantly increasing. Due
to advancements in technology we can communicate with
others throughout the world almost instantly. Despite
this, as individuals, we are drifting further apart from
each other, both physically and emotionally. Families
are disintegrating around us, and divorce rates are
soaring. Despite being offered so much facility by
materialistic society, we are feeling so unfulfilled. As
a fire does not decrease upon having oil poured upon it,
in the same way, giving into the demands of the mind and
senses will not satisfy us or give us peace, rather they
will relentlessly demand more and more gratification.



Could there be a way to find happiness apart from
sensual gratification? Are we nothing more than a
combination of lifeless atoms? Is the goal of life
nothing more than accumulation of wealth or sensual
satisfaction? Such questions have arisen in the mind of
mankind since time immemorial. Indeed it is this
proclivity for investigation that separates us from the
birds and beasts.



Indian’s ancient traditions are established by the
Vedas, which were originally handed down from guru to
disciple through the process of submissive hearing. They
were then compiled into a vast body of sacred literature
which provides information on all aspects of knowledge,
from the material aspects of our life, like health care
and city planning, to the esoteric and divine aspects,
such as reincarnation of the soul, meditation and the
science of God realization.



In the Vedānta-sūtra, a sacred philosophical text, the
first statement informs us, with urgency and simplicity,
what is the most important question to ask in this human
form of life: “athāto brahma-jijñāsā – Now, in this
human form, it is imperative that one should inquire
into the nature of the Absolute Truth.” Of course the
next question arises: “From whom should I inquire?” This
book, Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā, discusses this question
in depth, and also provides an answer to this most
ancient of all questions. Selected verses from the Vedic
literatures have been assembled here to provide the
reader with a comprehensive analysis of this question,
thus allowing him access to this wisdom so that he can
apply it in his own life. Stated simply, this book will
give the reader the proper understanding of Vedic
science. Just as when milk is churned, butter

                              2
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

automatically rises to the top of the milk pail, in the
same way, the essence of this sacred tradition known as
the Vedic literatures has been churned and presented to
us in a systematic manner. For the benefit of the modern
reader it has been presented in this small booklet as an
easy to understand introduction to this ancient system
of thought. This message has risen from the expansive
ocean of all varieties of knowledge, both phenomenal and
spiritual, that have been expressed in the Vedas, since
the beginning of time.



This small book, Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā was composed by
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura (1838–1914), and published in
the year 1892 from Kolkata, West Bengal, India. He
engineered the renaissance of devotion in this modern
age. A prolific writer, he composed hundreds of books,
songs, and articles in many languages, and was a perfect
example of what he preached.



Svāmī B. V. Dāmodara




Introduction



Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā was originally com-posed in the
Bengali language by the incarnation of auspiciousness
upon this world, oṁ viśṇupāda Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is to be included as
an intimate member among the eternal associates of Śrī
Śacīnandana Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is the purifier of
the age of Kali and the source of all incarnations. Now
that this essay has become available to the faithful
readers in the Hindi language, we are experiencing the
most profound joy to serve the heart-felt desire of our
most worshipful spiritual master, the lion-like ācārya
and jagad-guru, oṁ viśṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja.



After the disappearance of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas such
as the six Gosvāmis, Śrī Kṛṣṇa dāsa Kavirāja, Śrī
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, the pure Vaiṣṇava dharma and true
teachings, as practiced and preached by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, had become almost entirely lost. The most
dear associate of Śrī Gaurasundara, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, appeared within this material world and
composed a great number of books in the Sanskrit,
Bengali, Hindi, Oriya, and English languages. For this,
he became famous as the seventh Goswāmī in the
historical annals of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition.




                              3
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura manifested the Śrī Daśa-mūla-
tattva (ten fundamental truths) from the ocean of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s teachings, thus bestowing
unlimited auspiciousness upon the Vaiṣṇava world. This
Śrī Daśa-mūla-tattva is the infallible medicine and
remedial diet for the eternal disease of material
existence. By this spiritually scientific process,
consisting of the philosophical understanding of the
stages of sambandha, abhidheya, and prayojana, all the
main teachings of Śrīman Mahāprabhu have been strung
together to form a necklace of Vaiṣṇava conclusions, or
siddhāntas.



At the time when the famous Gauḍīya-vedānta-ācārya, Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, was composing his Govinda Bhāṣya
commentary on the Śrī Brahma-sūtra (Vedānta-sūtra), he
also wrote a book named Prameya Ratnāvalī, in which he
summarized the philosophy of his predecessor spiritual
master, Śrīman Madhvācārya. In this book one will find
the philosophical presentation of the nine prameyas
(truths) as presented by the original Supreme Person,
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu:



śrī-madhvaḥ prāha viṣṇuṁ paratamam akhilāmnāya-vedyaṁ ca
viśvaṁ

satyaṁ bhedañ ca jīvān hari-caraṇa-juṣas tāratamyaṁ ca
teṣām

mokṣaṁ viṣṇv-aṅghri-lābhaṁ tad-amala-bhajanaṁ tasya
hetuṁ pramāṇaṁ

pratyakṣādi-trayaṁ cety upadiśati hariḥ kṛṣṇa-caitanya-
candraḥ



“Śrī Madhvācārya says: (1) Lord Viṣṇu is the Supreme
Absolute Truth; (2) He is the object to be known by the
study of the entire Vedas; (3) the material world is
real; (4) the jīvas (living entities) are different from
Lord Viṣṇu; (5) the jīvas are by nature eternal servants
of Bhagavān; (6) the jīvas are classified as either
conditioned or liberated; (7) liberation (mokṣa) means
the attainment of Bhagavān; (8) pure devotional service
is the method to attain liberation; (9) direct
perception (pratyakṣa), logical inference (anumāṇa), and
Vedic authority (śabda) are the three sources of actual
knowledge. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has instructed us in
these nine philosophical conclusions of Śrī
Madhvācārya.”



In this small book named Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has briefly described these nine
philosophical conclusions (prameyas) in simple,
straightforward, and easily understandable language.
Along with this, in the second part of this book, he has
presented an authoritative and touching deliberation on

                              4
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

the subject of the pure holy name (śuddha hari-nāma),
the semblance of the holy name (nāmābhāsa), and the
offensive stage of chanting (nāmāparādha). This is most
helpful to the sādhaka, or practitioner of bhakti.



I have full conviction that for the faithful readers,
and especially for the practitioners of pure devotion
(śuddha-bhakti), this book will be like a valuable
necklace.



Begging for a particle of mercy from Śrī Hari, Guru and
the Vaiṣṇavas,

Humble and insignificant,



Tridaṇḍibhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa




Chapter One


Nava-prameya-siddhānta - Nine Truths



Q. What order has our supremely worshipable Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu given to us?



A. His order is that we very carefully follow the
instruc-tions concerning the nine philosophical
conclusions that Śrīman Madhvācārya passed on to us
through the guru-paramaparā (disciplic succession).



Q. What is the guru-paramaparā?



A. The ādi-guru (original spiritual master) of all
spiritual masters is Bhagavān Himself. He mercifully
instructed Lord Brahmā, the original disciple (ādi-
kavi), on the philosophical truths concerning Himself,
the Absolute Truth. These truths were, in turn,
successively taught by Brahmā to Śrī Nārada, by Nārada
to Śrī Vyāsadeva, and then by Vyāsa to Śrī Madhvācārya.
Such instructions received by the disciple from the
spiritual master are called directives received through
the disciplic succession (guru-paramaparā-upadeśa).



Q. What are the nine philosophical conclusions preached

                              5
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

by Śrī Madhvācārya ?



A. These are the nine tattvas:

(1) Bhagavān alone is the Supreme and Absolute Truth.

(2) He is the supreme object of knowledge described
throughout the entire Vedas.

(3) The universe is real (satya).

(4) The following five types of differences (bheda) are
all true: the differences between God and the individual
spirit soul (jīva), the differences between one soul and
another soul, the differences between the soul and
matter, the differences between God and matter, and the
differences between matter and matter are all real.

(5) The individual soul (jīva) is the eternal servant of
Bhagavān, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

(6) All souls are graded differently according to their
position, as either liberated or conditioned (baddha).

(7) Liberation (mokṣa) means to attain the lotus feet of
Bhagavān.

(8) Bhakti, or worship of Bhagavān is the only cause of
liberation.

(9) Pratyakṣa (direct perception), anumāna (logical
inference), and śabda (statements of the Vedic
scriptures) are the three types of evidence or pramāṇa.




Chapter Two


Bhagavān Alone Is the Supreme Truth



Q. Who is Bhagavān, the Supreme Person?



A. Bhagavān (God) is He who manifests all the individual
souls (jīvas) and all inert matter by dint of His own
inconceivable potencies (acintya-śakti), and then enters
within them as the Supreme Controller (iśvara-svarūpa).
He also transcends all souls and matter in His form as
Kṛṣṇa. As such, He is far beyond the reach of material
intelligence. It is He who manifests His own divine,
completely spiritual form composed of eternity,
knowledge, and bliss (sac-cid-ānanda svarūpa) by dint of
His Supreme potency, the parā-śakti. He is the object of
devotion for every individual soul.



                              6
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                      5/5/2017


Q. What is the śakti, or potency, of Bhagavān?



A. We are unable to factually describe the Lord’s
potency because His śaktis are unlimited, whereas we
have limitations. It is for this reason His potency is
called parā-śakti [literally, the Supreme potency]. What
is completely impossible for us is easily performed by
this potency of the Lord. This ability or power of
Bhagavān to perform that which is impossible is called
His aghaṭana-ghaṭana-paṭīyasī-śakti. By dint of this
potency, all irreconcilable contradictions are
completely, instantaneously, and simultaneously
harmonised and manifest within Him.



Q. Then is Bhagavān subordinate to this śakti?



A. It is not that Bhagavān is one entity and that His
śakti is another separate entity. Just as the burning
power of fire is inseparable from the fire, similarly
Bhagavān’s śakti is inseparable from Him.



Q. If Bhagavān is the one and only Supreme Truth, then
why did Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu give His followers
instructions about Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His śakti, or potency?



A. Bhagavān has six eternal qualities: He possesses all
opulences (aiśvarya), strength (vīrya), fame (yaśa),
beauty (śrī), knowledge (jñāna), and renunciation
(vairāgya). The various forms of the Lord manifest
according to the degree to which these specific
qualities are expressed. For example, when His quality
of great opulence is prominently manifest, then this
form is called the Lord of the spiritual sky, Śrī
Nārāyaṇa, and when His quality of nectarean sweetness
predominates, then He manifests as Vṛndāvana-Candra, the
moon of Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
alone is the topmost manifestation of Bhagavān.



Q. How many forms does the Lord have?



A. He has only one form. That form is fully spiritual,
supremely beautiful, and attractive to all. It is
overflowing with divine bliss, always engaged in
activities, or līlās, and perceivable by pure love
(prema). According to the different natures possessed by
different souls, the Lord’s eternal form manifests to
them in an infinite number of ways. However, the
individual souls, according to their particular nature,
accept these many different manifestations of the Lord

                              7
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                      5/5/2017

as separate individual forms. The form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the eternal blissful form, or svarūpa, of the Lord.



Q. What are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, or līlā?



A. The most charming portion of the spiritual world is
called Śrī Vṛndāvana. There, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is composed
of eternality, knowledge, and bliss, is eternally
present in the form of the Divine Couple Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, for the purpose of performing eternal pastimes.
When the individual jīva souls manifest their eternal
forms of divine bliss, or their eternal svarūpa, in the
form of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s maidservants, then they attain
the qualification for entering Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
pastimes within the all-spiritual abode of Śrī
Vṛndāvana. Śrīmati Rādhikā is the very personification
of supreme bliss. There is not the slightest presence of
either fear or death in these pastimes. The only
assistant of these activities of the Lord, or līlā, is
unbroken spiritual bliss.



Q. What are the obstacles to the attainment of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, or līlā?



A. There are two obstacles: (1) material intelligence
(jaḍa-buddhi) and (2) impersonalism.



Q. What do you mean by material intelligence?



A. Material intelligence is that which develops due to
the crippling influence of material time, material
place, material objects, materialistic desires,
materialistic thoughts, and materialistic activities. By
material intelligence, one sees the transcendental realm
of Śrī Vṛndāvana to be a material place. One sees time
to be divided into three parts: past, present, and
future. Are perishable objects the only objects to be
perceived? By material intelligence, all of one’s
aspirations are directed towards hopes for impermanent
happiness, such as attainment of the heavenly planets.
In this condition, the soul cannot think of anything
spiritual, being confined by material thoughts. Such
souls imagine their ‘duty’ to be temporary activities
such as the development of civilization, morality,
science, industry, and the increase of material
prosperity.



Q. What is impersonalism, or nirviśeṣa-buddhi?



                              8
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017


A. That nature by which one recognizes the distinct
varieties within this world is called ‘viśeṣa.’ The
tendency towards impersonalism that arises when the
materialistic thought process is rejected, along with
its concomitant power of discrimination, is called
nirviśeṣa-buddhi. Such people are then unable to
differentiate between objects, and they eventually think
themselves as having attained emancipation (nirvāṇa) or
having merged with the impersonal brahma-jyoti
effulgence. In this condition there is no real
happiness. Due to an absence of spiritual bliss, prema,
pure devotional service is hidden from them. Even though
the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are beyond matter, they are
not devoid of variety; rather, they are full of
spiritual variegation.



Q. If the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are beyond matter, then
how were they able to be seen at the end of Dvāpara-
yuga?



A. The pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are unperceivable to the
material senses. However, by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s inconceivable
potency, His transcendental and non-material activities
are also able to manifest within the material world.
Even though Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are manifested within
this material world, they never blend with matter or
become subject to the rules of matter. Whether manifest
within the material world (prakaṭa-līlā) or within the
spiritual world (aprakaṭa-līlā), the pastimes of Śrī
Krsna are always purely spiritual. All the pastimes of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa are performed in Śrī Vṛndāvana, the spiritual
world. Even so, by the inconceivable potency and
limitless mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, those same pastimes appear
within this material world and also within the hearts of
the pure jīva souls. Yet people with materialistic
consciousness are unable to properly realize the
completely spiritual nature of these pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa when they are manifested in the material world.
Instead, they understand them as materialistic
activities and try to analyze them with the help of
mundane logic and argument. The result of this is that
they are cheated, and they see so many faults within
those transcendental pastimes. Whoever becomes freed
from materialistic consciousness, as were Jagāi and
Madhāi [greatly evil materialists who were delivered by
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu], will be able to factually
understand these truths. Seeing the Lord’s pastimes as
being completely free from any touch of material
inebriety, such fortunate souls become attracted to
them. Without understanding the truth about Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
one cannot relish rasa, or the taste of service to Him.



Q. These truths of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are available only within
the religious principles of the Vaiṣṇavas. What will be
the destination of those who follow another religion?



                              9
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017


A. The instructions available within different religions
for the worship of Iśvara (the Supreme Controller),
Paramātmā (the localized Supersoul in the heart), or
Brahman (the all-pervading impersonal feature, which is
the effulgence of His body), all ultimately have Śrī
Kṛṣṇa as their final goal. By gradual development, the
jīvas will evolve and eventually attain bhakti to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. When these partial religious paths attain
completeness, they transform into bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
For the jīva, supreme knowledge means expertise in
kṛṣṇa-tattva.




Chapter Three


He Is Knowable by All the Vedas



Q. How can one know the truth about the Lord (bhagavat-
tattva)?



A. He can be known by the soul’s own self-manifest
innate knowledge (svataḥ-siddha-jñāna).



Q. What is self-manifest knowledge (svataḥ-siddha-
jñāna)?



A. There are two types of knowledge: (1) self-manifest,
or svataḥ-siddha-jñāna and (2) that which depends on the
senses, or indriya-paratantra-jñāna. Self-manifest
knowledge is that which is inherently a feature of the
pure soul’s original spiritual form, or svarūpa. It is
eternal, just like all spiritual reality. This inherent
self-manifest knowledge is called Veda or āmnāya. This
pure knowledge, or svataḥ-siddha-jñāna, has appeared
along with the conditioned soul in the material world in
the form of the Vedas, namely the Ṛg-veda, Yajur-veda,
Sāma-veda, and Atharva-veda. Ordinary people collect
knowledge of various objects by the help of their
material senses. This is called indriya-paratantra-
jñāna.



Q. Can one know the truth about Bhagavān by this
indriya-paratantra-jñāna (knowledge based on the senses)
or not?



A. No. Bhagavān, the Supreme Person, is beyond the scope
of all the material senses. For this reason, He is known

                              10
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

as Adhokṣaja. The knowledge acquired from the senses, as
well as material speculation and logic generated from
the mind with the help of the senses, always remains
very far from giving a true conception of Bhagavān.



Q. If Bhagavān is attained through the soul’s own self-
manifested knowledge (svataḥ-siddha-jñāna), then what is
the necessity of studying the Vedic scriptures?



A. It is true that the Veda is present in every pure
spirit soul in the form of svataḥ-siddha-jñāna. However,
that self-manifest Vedic knowledge awakens in the heart
in proportion to the soul’s freedom from bondage. It is
manifest completely in some, and present in a covered
form within others. In order to make that svataḥ-siddha-
jñāna available to everyone, the Vedas have appeared in
this world.



Q. We have heard that Bhagavān is perceivable only
through bhakti (devotional service). If this is true,
then how can we say that He is perceivable by jñāna
(svataḥ-siddha-jñāna)?



A. This svataḥ-siddha-jñāna is another name for devotion
(bhakti). It is not different from devotion. Some refer
to realization of the Absolute Truth as jñāna, while
others call it bhakti.



Q. Then why is jñāna so condemned in the devotional
scriptures?



A. The devotional scriptures have greatly glorified
svataḥ-siddha-jñāna, because there is no other means for
the jīva to attain freedom from inauspiciousness. The
jīva cannot attain actual benefit by indriya-paratantra-
jñāna (that knowledge which depends on the senses) or
nirviśeṣa-jñāna (knowledge of the impersonal feature of
the absolute truth). Thus, both these types of knowledge
have been decried in the devotional scriptures.



Q. Throughout all the Vedic scriptures there are
descriptions of karma (fruitive activities), jñāna
(speculative knowledge), and bhakti (devotional
service). By which of these can the tattva (truth) of
Bhagavān be known?



A. By thoroughly examining all the statements of the
Vedas, it is clearly seen that apart from Bhagavān,

                              11
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

there is nothing else worth knowing. All karma (fruitive
activities) mentioned in the Vedas ultimately have
Bhagavān as their goal. In its completely purified state
—free from the duality of material enjoyment and
impersonalism—jñāna (speculative knowledge) also has
Bhagavān as its ultimate goal. Bhakti (devotional
service) is natural and perpetual service to Bhagavān.
Therefore, Bhagavān is the object of knowledge
throughout the Vedas.




Chapter Four


The Universe Is Real



Q. Some people say, “This universe is false—it is only
instigated by the illusionary material energy (māyā)!”
What is the real truth?



A. This universe is real, but perishable. The two
adjectives ‘real’ and ‘eternal’ have different meanings.
The material universe is not eternal, because it will
eventually be destroyed according to the Lord’s desire.
This universe is a factual reality; it is not false.
Sometimes the scriptures say that this universe is
false, but it is to be understood that this statement
merely refers to its perishability.




A. Bhagavān’s one Supreme Potency, the parā-śakti, is
composed of an infinite variety of potencies. Among all
of these, we have knowledge about three in particular:
(1) cit-śakti (the spiritual potency); (2) jīva-śakti
(the potency that produces the individual spirit souls);
and (3) māyā-śakti (the illusionary potency). From His
cit potency, the Lord manifests His own forms, and He
reveals Himself to others. From His jīva potency, the
Lord manifests a limitless number of tiny atomic
particles of consciousness, the individual souls.
Whatever manifests from His māyā, or illusionary
potency, is perishable; however, it is real during the
time it is manifest.




Chapter Five


Difference (bheda) Is Real



                              12
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017


Q. Since both Bhagavān and the jīvas are described as
being conscious (caitanya), is the difference between
them imaginary?



A. No. Bhagavān’s consciousness is unlimited and all-
pervading (vibhu-caitanya), while the jīva’s
consciousness is infinitesimal and localized (anu-
caitanya). This difference between them is not
imaginary, but factual. Bhagavān is the Controller of
His own māyā-śakti, whereas the jīvas are subordinate to
the illusionary potency named māyā.

Q. How many types of bheda (difference) are there?



A. There are two types of bheda: vyavahārika
(functional) and tāttvika (philosophical).



Q. What is vyavahārika-bheda, or functional difference?



A. This is when two objects are different in terms of
their function, but not different in terms of their
origin. There is a difference between a clay pot and a
piece of cloth, as they are used for different purposes.
However, they both originate from the same thing—namely,
the soil of the earth—and in their original condition as
soil, there is no difference between them. This type of
difference is thus called vyavahārika-bheda.



Q. What is tāttvika-bheda?



A. This is when two objects are different in terms of
both their function as well as their original cause.
This type of difference is called tāttvika-bheda.



Q. Is the difference between the individual soul (jīva)
and Bhagavān vyavahārika or tāttvika?



A. Tāttvika.



Q. Why is that?



A. That is because in no condition whatsoever can the
jīva become Bhagavān.

                              13
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017




Q. Then how are we to understand the profound statements
(mahā-vākyas) of the scriptures like tat-tvam-asi (you
are that)?



A. The great sage Śvetaketu was given the following
instructions: “tat-tvam-asi (you are that); you are
jīva, the eternal spirit soul; and you are not born from
matter, but from consciousness (caitanya).” It should
never be understood from this lesson that the jīva is
the supreme all-pervading consciousness (vibhu-
caitanya). To conclude thus is an error.



Q. Then are the scriptural statements regarding the non-
difference of the jīva and the Lord improper?



A. When seen from the jīva’s point of view, the
difference between the two is eternal, but from
Bhagavān’s point of view, the non-difference is eternal.
Therefore, the difference (bheda) and non-difference
(abheda) between the individual soul and the Lord are
both simultaneously eternal and true.



Q. How can we understand this mutually contradictory
conclusion?



A. By the Lord’s inconceivable potency (acintya-śakti),
all contradictory truths can be perfectly reconciled and
exist in complete harmony. However, the tiny jīvas, who
possess very limited intelligence, think that such
things are impossible.



Q. Then why do we hear condemnation of the philosophy of
non-difference (abheda-vāda)?



A. The proponents of monism only accept the non-
difference of the Lord and the individual soul as
eternal, and they believe the quality of difference to
be temporary. Śrī Madhvācārya established the quality of
difference as eternal. Thus, there is no fault at all in
the theory of acintya-bhedābheda (simultaneous oneness
and difference between Bhagavān and the jīva soul). In
fact, there is fault within both the philosophies of
exclusive monism and exclusive dualism because one is
inclined towards the side of duality and does not accept
the non-difference between the Lord and the individual
soul, and the other is partial towards non-difference
and does not accept the eternal truth of duality.

                              14
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017




Q. Who subscribes to the philosophy of kevala-abheda-
vāda, or complete and absolute non-difference?



A. The monists, or nirviśeṣa-vādis (propounders of
eternal non-distinction), accept only the philosophy of
non-difference, or abheda-vāda. In contrast, the
saviśeṣa-vādis (propounders of eternal distinction) do
not accept this philosophy of exclusive monism.



Q. Who accepts the philosophy of eternal distinction
(saviśeṣa-vāda)?



A. This is the philosophy accepted by all the devotional
Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas.



Q. How many sampradāyas (lineages) do the Vaiṣṇavas
have?



A. There are four Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas, each of them
following one of these four philosophies: dvaita (pure
dualism); viśiṣṭādvaita (qualified monism);
dvaitādvaita, (naturally occurring oneness and
difference); and śuddhādvaita (purified monism).



Q. What are the differences among these four ideologies?



A. There are no actual differences among their
doctrines, for they are all saviśeṣa-vādis (believers in
eternal distinction). None of them accept the theory of
absolute monism, or kevala-abheda-vāda. They are all
dedicated to Bhagavān, and they all accept the Lord’s
potencies. Those of the dvaita school (pure dualism)
have shown the eternal differences between Bhagavān and
the jīva. They say that those proponents of pure non-
distinction (kevalādvaita) are totally blind. This is
the opinion of Śrī Madhvācārya. The followers of
viśiṣṭādvaita (qualified monism) say that all things are
endowed with attributes and therefore can never be said
to be devoid of distinction. This is the philosophy of
Śrī Rāmānujācārya. The proponents of dvaitādvaita
(natural occurring oneness and difference) clearly
refute the impersonal philosophy of pure monism. This is
the philosophy established by Śrī Nimbāditya Ācārya. The
doctrine of śuddhādvaita (purified monism) of Śrī Viṣṇu
Swami also condemns the purely monistic conception
presented by the impersonalists and describes the
eternal attributes of the Supreme Truth, and has proven

                              15
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

this philosophy with evidence from the scriptures. Upon
thoroughly studying these four philosophies, one is
unable to see any real difference among them.



Q. Then why did Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu accept only the
doctrine of Śrī Madhvācārya?



A. The special characteristic of Madhvā’s doctrine is
that of all of these philosophies, it most conclusively
defeats illusion in the form of the monistic ādvaita
philosophy. By taking shelter of the theory of Śrī
Madhvācārya, the distress caused by the impersonal
philosophy is thrown very far away. Therefore, in order
to bring about unambiguous auspiciousness for enfeebled
mankind, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted the doctrine
of Śrī Madhvācārya. Yet we must never think that the
other three Vaiṣṇava doctrines are in any way inferior
or rejectable. Whatever way one accepts saviśeṣa-vāda
(the philosophy of eternal distinction) is fine, for it
will certainly bring eternal auspiciousness for the
soul.




Chapter Six


The Soul Is the Servant of Śrī Hari



Q. What is the natural, eternal constitutional position
(nitya-dharma) of the spirit soul?



A. The nitya-dharma of the jīva is service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Q. What is diametrically opposed to that natural state
of the soul (vi-dharma)?



A. Vi-dharma is the state experienced when the jīva
accepts the monistic philosophy and searches for
nirvāṇa, or when the soul endeavours for material
pleasure or proficiency.



Q. Why do you call these things unnatural?



A. The jīva is spiritual, and its nature is also
spiritual. That nature is love or bliss. To completely

                              16
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                      5/5/2017

extinguish one’s existence (nirvāṇa) is the main goal of
impersonalism, and there is no bliss in this. In
experiencing materialistic pleasure, there must be a
diminishment of the variegated spiritual happiness
experienced by the soul. Both impersonalism and
materialism are unnatural and opposed to the real nature
of the spirit soul.



Q. Who searches after materialistic happiness?



A. Only those who are attached to material sense
enjoyment endeavour on the path of karma to attain the
enjoyment of the heavenly planets and other sensual
pleasures.



Q. Who searches for material proficiency?



A. Those yogis who have achieved perfection in the path
of aṣṭāṅga-yoga (eight-fold yoga process) and ṣaḍaṅga-
yoga (six-fold yoga process) search for material
proficiency through the attainment of mystic powers.



Q. What will remain for the soul if both materialistic
happiness and impersonal nirvāṇa are considered
worthless?



A. What remains is the blissful nature of the self.
These two previously mentioned types of happiness are
merely artificial impositions upon the soul. The
realization of the soul’s natural blissful essence is
not a material imposition.



Q. What is genuine happiness?



A. Real happiness is the pure state of the spirit soul,
free from any relationship with matter and in this pure
state there is a cultivation of the soul’s inherent
devotional service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is the blissful
nature of the soul.




Chapter Seven


Different Grades of Souls

                              17
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                       5/5/2017




Q. Are all souls of one type or are there different
gradations amongst them?



A. There are different gradations amongst the jīvas.



Q. How many gradations are there?



A. There are two: those who have realized the truth
about their natural eternal form (svarūpa-gata), and
those still identifying with their material coverings
(upādhi-gata).



Q. What are the material coverings of the soul?



A. Because the living entities are opposed to the
service of Kṛṣṇa, the deluding potency (māyā) covers
their eternal spiritual form. This illusionary covering
is the soul’s material designation or upādhi.



Q. Why do all souls not remain in their true position,
free from material designations?



A. Those souls who accept nothing other than service to
Kṛṣṇa as their eternal occupation, and who do not give
up their constitutional position, are always free from
matter, and are eternally inclined towards the
favourable service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. On the other hand,
those who think that material enjoyment is their real
self-interest and who thereby forget Kṛṣṇa, are bound in
this prison house formed by the illusionary material
energy, māyā.



Q. Kṛṣṇa can do anything. If He could protect the living
entity from this unfortunate misconception, that would
have been very good. Why hasn’t He done so?



A. In this regard, it may be said that if the individual
spirit souls had no independence, then they would be
inert and unconscious like matter. They could not attain
the bliss of independence that is inherent within
conscious entities.



                              18
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017


Q. What is the svarūpa, or eternal nature, of the
individual soul?



A. The soul is a spiritually conscious entity, and his
nature is blissfulness.



Q. How many gradations are there among souls situated in
their natural, eternal position (svarūpa)?



A. In the spiritual world, there are five types of
eternal relationships, or rasas, with Kṛṣṇa, and there
are gradations amongst the souls within those rasas.



Q. What are the five different rasas?



A. Neutrality (śānta), servitude (dāsya), friendship
(sakhya), paternity (vātsalya), and conjugal affection
(śṛṅgāra).



Q. Please explain these five in more detail.



A. (1) Attachment to Kṛṣṇa devoid of a close personal
relationship with Him is called śānta-rati; (2)
attachment to Kṛṣṇa that has a personal relationship,
but which consists of a mood of awe and reverence is
called dāsya-rati; (3) attachment to Kṛṣṇa which has a
personal relationship, but which is devoid of awe and
reverence and is full of intimate friendship is called
sakhya-rati; (4) attachment to Kṛṣṇa which has a
personal relationship and is full of a mood of parental
caring and affection is called vātsalya-rati; and (5)
attachment, or rati, to Kṛṣṇa characterized by conjugal
attraction to His beauty is called śṛṅgāra-rati.



Q. What is the difference between rati and rasa?



A. When rati is nourished by the combination of these
four supporting ingredients: (1) vibhāva (supporting
characters and specific stimulants), (2) anubhāva
(thirteen resultant ecstatic bodily actions), (3)
sāttvika-bhāva (eight ecstatic bodily symptoms), and (4)
vyabhicārī-bhāva (thirty-three transitory ecstatic
emotions), then eternally perfect rasa awakens. Rasa is
the manifestation of the top-most bliss.


                              19
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                       5/5/2017



Q. How many gradations are there amongst the materially
covered souls?



A. There are three basic types: (1) jīvas with covered
consciousness (ācchādita-cetana), like trees and plants;
(2) jīvas with shrunken consciousness (saṅkucita-
cetana), like animals and birds; and (3) jīvas with
budding consciousness (mukulita-cetana), like humans
bereft of devotion.



Q. How many types of materially conditioned or
spiritually liberated jīvas are there?



A. There are three basic types: (1) nitya-mukta, or
eternally liberated, souls who are transcendental to
matter; (2) baddha-mukta (literally, were bound but are
now liberated) or those who live in the material world
but are not influenced by it; and (3) nitya-baddha, or
perpetually conditioned, souls who are completely
entangled in material existence.




A. The souls possessing covered consciousness, shrunken
consciousness, and budding consciousness are considered
to be nitya-baddha, or eternally conditioned.



Q. How many types of souls are there that were
conditioned by māyā, but have since achieved liberation
(baddha-mukta)?



A. There are two types: (1) those with blossoming
consciousness (vikasita-cetana), like practicing
devotees (sādhana-bhaktas) and (2) those with fully
flowering consciousness (pūrṇa-vikasita-cetana), like
devotees who have attained the stage of preliminary love
of God (bhāva-bhakti).



Q. Where do the souls who are nitya-baddha (eternally
conditioned) and baddha-mukta (those who were bound but
have attained liberation) reside?



A. They live in the illusionary material world.




                              20
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

Q. Where do the souls who are nitya-mukta (eternally
liberated) reside?



A. In the spiritual world of Vaikuṇṭha (the place of no
anxiety).



Q. How many types of mukulita-cetana jīvas (those
possessed of budding consciousness) are there?



A. There are many types, but they can be roughly
classified into six general categories: (1) uncivilized
tribes of ignorant people; (2) civilized races which
have developed materialistic knowledge and science, and
place emphasis on industrialized production of material
goods, but which do not possess proper moral conduct,
nor do they have actual faith in God (these are the
characteristics of the mlecchas, or meat-eating races);
(3) races which have no belief in a personal God, but
which are very developed in terms of morality, like the
Buddhists; (4) races whose ethics are endowed with a
philosophical basis and have faith in a speculative
conception of God, just like the proponents of good
works, the karma-vādīs; (5) races which accept the Lord,
but do not perform devotional service unto Him; and (6)
races which are fond of nirviśeṣa-vāda (the doctrine of
impersonalism) and who are proponents of the theory of
speculative knowledge (jñāna).



Q. What are the different gradations amongst the living
entities?



A. From those entities possessed of covered-
consciousness up to those with budding-consciousness,
they are all classified according to the degree of their
engagement in the principles of devotional service unto
the Lord (bhakti). Among those with blossoming-
consciousness (the devotees of the Lord) and those with
fully-flowering-consciousness (the pure devotees), the
comparative levels are obvious.




Chapter Eight


Real Liberation Is the Attainment of Kṛṣṇa’s Lotus Feet



Q. How many different types of liberation (mokṣa) are
there?


                              21
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017



A. It is said that there are five types of liberation:
(1) sālokya, or attaining the same planet as the Lord;
(2) sārṣṭi ,or achieving divine opulences similar to the
Lord’s; (3) sāmīpya, or attaining residence near the
Lord; (4) sārupya ,or obtaining bodily features similar
to the Lord’s; and (5) sāyujya, or merging into the
Lord’s impersonal effulgence.



Of these, sāyujya-nirvāṇa, which is total annihilation
of the self, or the attainment of complete oneness with
the Supreme, is a mistaken concoction found within the
philosophy of nirviśeṣa-vāda (impersonalism). Such
liberation should not be desired by the jīva souls. Upon
considering the matter from the point of view of the
impersonal Brahman, the liberation of merging is a type
of perfection, but it is not proper for the jīvas. When
the truth of simultaneous oneness and difference
(bhedābheda) is properly understood, then the philosophy
of absolute monism, which completely negates all
differences between the jīva and Bhagavān, becomes
untenable.



Q. Then what is actual liberation?



A. Actual liberation is to attain the shelter of the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with our pure spiritual form.



Q. Why is the attainment of the shelter of the lotus
feet of Śrī Krsna accepted as liberation?



A. Attaining the shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet and
becoming freed from any relationship with matter occur
simultaneously. If one takes even the slightest shelter
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, then one recieves the fruit
of liberation. The happiness of drinking the nectar of
the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the eternal result.
Therefore, what else could possibly be called
liberation?



Q. Please illustrate this by an example.



A. The lighting of a lamp and the dispelling of darkness
occur simultaneously. In this example, the darkness
represents the principle of impersonal liberation, and
the lamplight represents the nectar of the lotus feet of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The light of the lamp is eternal, while the
dispelling of the darkness is not, as it exists only for
a particular moment, whereas the illumination of the

                              22
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

light is eternal.




Chapter Nine


The Pure Worship of Kṛṣṇa Is the Cause of Liberation



Q. How can one get liberation in the form of attaining
the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa?



A. One can attain liberation in the form of attaining
the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa only by pure devotional
service (bhakti).



Q. What is pure devotional service?



A. The service, devoid of any material contamination,
performed by a soul bound by māyā, purely to become
favourably inclined towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is called pure
devotional service, or vimala-kṛṣṇa-bhajana.



Q. What are the impurities that should be avoided in
devotional service to Kṛṣṇa?



A. The three impurities are the desire for material
sense gratification, the desire for impersonal
liberation, and the desire for mystic powers.



Q. What are the desires for material sense
gratification?



A. There are three kinds: the desire for the enjoyment
of worldly sensual pleasures, the desire for the
enjoyment of attaining the heavenly material planets in
the next life, and the desire for the peace that comes
from dry renunciation.



Q. How will one maintain the body if one gives up the
objects of the senses, religious principles that bring
happiness in the next life, and renunciation? How will
this benefit the world? How will this relieve one of the
troubles that arise due to attachment for matter?

                              23
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017




A. One should not reject the objects of the senses or
religious principles meant for the welfare of the world
or renunciation that brings about peace; rather, one
should abandon the attachment for and the desire to
enjoy the objects of the senses.



Q. How can that be possible?



A. As long as one is following the system of varṇāśrama-
dharma (the institution dividing society into four
divisions of social life and four occupational
divisions), one should continue following all the
bodily, mental, and social duties that are necessary
according to that system. One should perform all these
activities in such a way as to directly assist one’s
cultivation of devotional service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One
should not act in such a way as to create an obstacle to
one’s cultivation of pure service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In
whatever situation one finds oneself, one should always
nourish the tendency to engage in devotion by performing
activities directly dedicated to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. By doing so,
all of one’s material activities, religious activities,
and renunciation will lead one to ultimate perfection.



Q. When material duties are very different from
spiritual reality, how will performing them nourish
one’s eternal spiritual nature?



A. The secret is to engage all the activities of the
senses, all materialistic knowledge, and all material
relationships in connection to the devotional service of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One should engage all of one’s senses in the
service of the sacred Deity form of the Lord, honour the
remnants of food offered to Him (prasādam), and
continuously describe His wonderful qualities. One
should also smell the sandalwood-smeared Tulasī leaves
that have been offered to the feet of Kṛṣṇa, hear and
speak about His pastimes, be in contact with people and
things that are related to Him, take his darshan in the
temple, and in this way increase one’s attachment to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. As one gradually dedicates all activities to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, one’s duties will not interfere with these
activities, but rather assist in the attainment of
spiritual perfection, or the state of bhāva.



Q. If I perform materialistic activities (karma) for the
maintenance of the body, as well as eliminate all
material desires, then will the attainment of samādhi by
the process of jñāna help me in my practice of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness or not?


                              24
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                      5/5/2017



A. No, because material attachment (rāga) is related to
the sense-objects. By yama, niyama (regulated practices
of the yoga process), and pratyāhāra (withdrawing the
mind from worldly attractions), one remains unable to
restrict the natural relationship between the senses and
their objects. Until the senses find something superior
to material enjoyment, they will remain unable to
abandon their previous attachment. If there is something
present before you that is superior, then your flow of
attachment can rush toward it, and you can very easily
give up the attachment to any former object of
enjoyment. Therefore, only the process that we
previously mentioned constitutes amala-kṛṣṇa-bhajana
(untainted devotion to Kṛṣṇa).



Q. Then what do you call samala-kṛṣṇa-bhajana (impure
worship of Kṛṣṇa)?



A. The worship of Kṛṣṇa that is performed by one who
maintains the mentality of fruitive materialistic gain,
one who endeavours in yoga practice, or one who desires
impersonal liberation is called mala (tainted with
impurities). By such devotion one cannot attain true
liberation in the form of shelter at Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nectar-
filled lotus feet.



Q. Please summarize the regulations concerning untainted
worship of Kṛṣṇa.



A. Whatever sinless and proper actions one performs to
maintain the material body during one’s journey through
life, which are done to assist devotion, are known as
secondary devotion, or gauṇī-bhakti. Whenever one gets a
chance, one should engage in direct devotional service.



Q. How many types of direct devotional service are
there?



A. There are nine types: (1) śravaṇa (hearing); (2)
kīrtana (chanting); (3) kṛṣṇa-smaraṇa (remembering
Kṛṣṇa); (4) pāda-sevana (serving His lotus feet); (5)
arcanā (deity worship); (6) vandana (offering prayers);
(7) dāsya (becoming His servant); (8) sakhya (becoming
His friend); and (9) ātma-nivedana (complete surrender).



Q. What will be the result of performing these
practices?


                              25
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017



A. You will experience an awakening of bhāva, and then
prema.



Q. What is prema?



A. It cannot be explained with words; it is a divinely
spiritual rasa [the nectarean taste experienced from
one’s relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa]. You should make
endeavours to taste it yourself, and then you can
realize it.



Q. What things should we remain careful of during the
practicing stage of devotion?



A. One should remain careful of vikarma (sinful
activities), akarma (inaction), and karma-jaḍata
(inertia caused by karma); dry or improper renunciation;
dry knowledge; and offences.



Q. How many types of sinful activity (vikarma) are
there, and what are they?



A. There are many types of vikarma. The following are
some of the more grievous sins: (1) envy; (2) harshness;
(3) cruelty; (4) act of violence toward any living
creature; (5) lust for the wives of others; (6) anger;
(7) greed for the possessions of others; (8)
selfishness; (9) falsity; (10) disrespect; (11) pride;
(12) mental delusion; (13) impurity; (14) vandalism; and
(15) causing offence to others.



Q. What is akarma?



A. Atheism, ingratitude, and absence of service to great
souls.



Q. What is karma?



A. Karma refers to performing pious activities. There
are many types of pious activities, and these are the
most prominent ones: (1) helping others; (2) serving
one’s superiors; (3) charity; (4) producing progeny; (5)

                              26
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                     5/5/2017

truthfulness; (6) purity or cleanliness; (7) simplicity;
(8) forgiveness; (9) mercy; (10) working according to
one’s own qualification; (11) appropriate renunciation;
and (12) neutrality.



Q. What is karma-jaḍatā, or material inertia?



A. Karma-jaḍatā, or material inertia, occurs when
material acquisitions or happiness gained from pious
activities make the mind complacent; one thinks ‘this is
enough’ and turns away from endeavouring for spiritual
advancement.



Q. What is dry or improper renunciation?



A. Renunciation that comes from one’s own endeavour or
practice is known as śuṣka-vairagya, or dry
renunciation, but renunciation that automatically
manifests due to the development of bhakti is called
yukta-vairagya, or appropriate renunciation.



Q. What is dry knowledge?



A. It is that knowledge which has no relationship with
spiritual reality, or cit-tattva.



Q. How many types of offences (aparādha) are there?



A. There are two types of offences: sevāparādha
(offences committed during the performance of devotional
service), and nāmāparādha (offences committed towards
the holy names of the Lord).



Q. How can one’s devotional practices become pure?



A. One’s bhajana becomes pure by remaining within this
world in an unattached manner, and after having received
pure knowledge, engaging in hearing and chanting in the
association of saintly devotees (sādhu-saṅga).




                              27
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                     5/5/2017

Chapter Ten


Three Evidences - Spiritual Sound or Scripture (śabda),
Direct Sense Perception (pratyakṣa), and Logical
Inference (anumāna)



Q. What is evidence (pramāṇa)?



A. Pramāṇa is that by which the truth is ascertained.



Q. How many types of pramāṇa are there?



A. There are three types.



Q. What are they?



A. Spiritual sound or scripture (śabda), direct sense
perception (pratyakṣa), and logical inference (anumāna).



Q. What is śabda-pramāṇa, or spiritual sound?



A. All the self-manifest Vedic scriptures, which are the
very incarnations of perfect knowledge, are śabda-
pramāṇa, or evidence in the form of spiritual sound.
They constitute the best evidence, because without such
a form of evidence, it is not possible to attain
knowledge of truth that is beyond matter.



Q. Why can’t the Lord and the spiritual world be
observed by direct sense perception (pratyakṣa-pramāṇa)
and logic (anumāna-pramāṇa)?



A. All knowledge gathered by direct sense perception is
called pratyakṣa-pramāṇa, and the conclusions deduced by
such means are called anumāna-pramāṇa. Both of these can
give only material knowledge.



Q. If this is so, then why do we accept the processes of
direct perception and logic in ascertaining the truth of
the Supreme?


                              28
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017



A. Both direct senses perception (pratyakṣa-pramāṇa) and
logic (anumāna-pramāṇa) are somewhat effective means w
ith which to confirm the perfect truth determined by
śabda-pramāṇa. Thus, when both these forms of evidence
act in a subordinate position to śabda-pramāṇa, they can
also be counted as a means of pramāṇa.




Śrī Hari-nāma

by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura



The ocean of material existence is very difficult to
cross without the mercy of the Lord. It is not only
difficult, but impossible. Even though the jīvas are
superior to matter, they are by nature weak and
dependent on Bhagavān as their sole protector, guardian,
and savior. The individual jīva soul is aṇu-caitanya, an
atomic conscious being. He is dependent on and is the
servant of the Supreme Conscious Being, or Parama-
Caitanya Bhagavān. In other words, Parama-Caitanya
Bhagavān is the shelter for all jīvas. This world of
matter is created by the illusionary potency called
māyā. Therefore, the position of the jīva is the same as
that of an offender who is in prison. The jīva wanders
throughout the material creation as a result of his
opposition to Bhagavān. Those jīvas who are opposed to
Bhagavān are called baddha-jīvas (conditioned souls)
because they are chained by māyā, whereas those jīvas
who follow Bhagavān are released from māyā and are
called mukta-jīvas (liberated souls). This difference is
due to the variegated conditions in which the unlimited
jīvas are situated. Hence, there are two divisions of
souls, baddha-jīvas and mukta-jīvas.



By performing appropriate spiritual practices (sādhana),
the conditioned baddha-jīva attains the mercy of
Bhagavān and thus becomes capable of breaking the
powerful chains of illusion, or māyā. After lengthy
contemplation, our great saintly persons have
established three types of spiritual practice, or
sādhana: fruitive actions (karma), speculative knowledge
(jñāna), and devotion (bhakti).



Following the social system of prescribed work known as
varṇāśrama-dharma, as well as performing austerities
(tapasya), fire sacrifices (yajña), charity (dāna), vows
(vrata), and yoga are mentioned in the scriptures as
limbs of karma and their results are clearly described.
By deeply understanding the distinct nature of these
results, the primary effects of executing karma are
revealed. They are: (1) sense enjoyment on the earthly
planets; (2) sense enjoyment in the heavenly planets;

                              29
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

(3) relief from disease; and (4) the chance to perform
some great activity. If we separate the fourth effect—
performance of great activity—from the other three, it
seems that the results of enjoying the heavenly planets,
enjoying the earthly planets, and curing disease, which
the jīva acquires by performing karma, are all
perishable. They will be destroyed by Śrī Bhagavān’s
wheel of time. It is not possible to become free from
the bondage of illusion (māyā) by attaining these
results. On the contrary, their attainment will only
increase the desire to execute more karma, and this will
lead to further bondage. The opportunity to perform a
great activity also goes in vain if one does not use it.



In this regard, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.8) states:



dharmaḥ svanuṣṭhitaḥ puṁsāṁ

viṣvaksena-kathāsu yaḥ

notpādayed yadi ratiṁ

śrama eva hi kevalam



“The main purpose of varṇāśrama-dharma is to simplify
the life of a person who is performing his natural
occupational duty, so that he has sufficient time to
hear hari-kathā. However, if an attraction for hearing
hari-kathā is not developed within him, then all the
religious activities he performs in accordance with
varṇāśrama-dharma will be so much useless labor.”



Thus, I have explained how the ocean of material
existence cannot be crossed with the help of
karma.Jñāna, or speculative knowledge, is also
considered a practice by which a higher goal is
achieved. The result of jñāna is ātma-śuddhi
(purification of the coverings of the soul). The ātmā
(soul) is beyond matter, but when it forgets this
reality and takes shelter of matter, it becomes lost on
the path of karma. Karma is a term used to describe
work, or activity prescribed in the Vedas for the
attainment of material benefits.



By discussing the principles of jñāna, a person can come
to the conclusion that he is not composed of matter, but
is a transcendental, spiritual being. This type of jñāna
is generally called naiṣkarmya (self-realization). In
the stage of naiṣkarmya, the jīva is only able to relish
a limited amount of bliss (ānanda). This stage is also
called ātmārāmata (in which one finds pleasure in the
self alone). But when the jīva begins to realize his
eternal nature, and starts to relish his relationship
with Kṛṣṇa, he transcends the stage of naiṣkarmya. For

                              30
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

this reason, the saintly Nārada has stated in the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.12):



naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitaṁ

na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam



“Although jñāna may be free from all material
affiliation, it is not pleasing to the heart if it is
devoid of a conception of service to the infallible
Supreme Lord.”



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.7.10) also mentions:



ātmārāmāś ca munayo

nirgranthā apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim

itthaṁ-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ



“Śrī Hari possesses an astonishing quality: He attracts
all varieties of persons, including those who are self-
satisfied (ātmārāma) and free from all material
contaminations, to engage in service to Him.”



Therefore, jñāna and karma can only be called limbs of
sādhana when karma leads to the performance of
increasingly elevated pious action, and when jñāna
transcends the stage of naiṣkarmya. This performance of
good karma and the rejection of impersonal jñāna will
lead us to the practice of devotion (bhakti-sādhana). In
and of themselves, jñāna and karma are not accepted as
limbs of sādhana except when they lead us to bhakti. It
is then that they have some significance. Therefore,
only bhakti is called sādhana. When karma and jñāna lead
us to bhakti, they are considered as a sādhana.
Otherwise, bhakti, by its nature, is the very form of
sādhana itself.



The decision of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.20) clearly
explains this:



na sādhayati māṁ yogo

na sāṅkhyaṁ dharma uddhava


                              31
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

na svādhyāyas tapas tyāgo

yathā bhaktir mamorjitā



“Uddhava! Karma-yoga, sāṅkhya-yoga, or varṇāśrama-dharma
cannot please Me, nor can the study of the Vedas,
austerity, or renunciation. Only the performance of pure
bhakti actually pleases Me.”



Performing bhakti is the only way to please Bhagavān.
There is no other means. There are nine kinds of
sādhana-bhakti: śravaṇa (hearing), kīrtana (chanting),
smaraṇa (remembering), arcanā (worshipping), vandana
(praying), pāda-sevanam (offering obeisances), dāsya
(serving), sakhya (engaging in friendship), and ātmā-
nivedana (fully surrendering). Śravaṇa, kīrtana, and
smaraṇa are the primary limbs of sādhana. Their sādhya,
or object, should be Śrī Bhagavān’s name (nāma), form
(rūpa), qualities (guṇa), and pastimes (līlā). And of
these four, hari-nāma is the original seed. Thus,
according to the scriptures, hari-nāma is the root of
all worship:



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā



(Śrī-Bṛhan-Nāradīya-Purāna 3.8.126)



“In Kali-yuga, there is no deliverance for the jīva
except by the chanting of hari-nāma.”



By the word kalau, it is to be understood that although
there was never a time when śrī hari-nāma was not the
sole means for deliverance, still, in the present age of
Kali, when the various other mantras and practices have
become weak, it is especially appropriate to take
shelter of the all-powerful name of Śrī Hari.



In relation to hari-nāma, the Śrī Padma-Purāṇa states:



nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

                              32
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017


pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

’bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ



“The holy name of Kṛṣṇa is a transcendental wish-
fulfilling gem (cintāmaṇi), for there is no difference
between Kṛṣṇa’s name (nāma) and Kṛṣṇa Himself (nāmī). In
other words, the holy name is the bestower of the
supreme goal of life. This name of Kṛṣṇa is the very
form of transcendental mellows (caitanya-rasa-svarūpa).
It is completely pure; that is, it is unlimited and
eternally liberated, devoid of any connection with
māyā.”



Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī writes in his commentary on the above
verse:



ekam eva sac-cid-ānanda-rasādi-rūpaṁ

tattvaṁ dvidhāvirbhūtam ity arthaḥ



“Śrī-kṛṣṇa-tattva is the non-dual form of eternity,
knowledge, and bliss.” He has appeared in two forms: (1)
nāmī, the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself and (2) nāma, the
form of His own name.”



The essence of this is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is sarva-śaktimān,
the possessor of all potencies. All the manifestations
of the Supreme Person are the manifestations of His
potency or śakti. Although dependent on the Supreme
Person, śakti alone can reveal His transcendental form
to others. By depending on Her, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
transcendental form can be perceived, and by
impregnating Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name with Her infinite power,
She makes it famous everywhere. Thus, kṛṣṇa-nāma is a
wish-fulfilling spiritual gem or touchstone (cintāmaṇi-
svarūpa). It is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself (kṛṣṇa-svarūpa), and
the embodiment of supreme consciousness and
transcendental mellows (caitanya-rasa-svarūpa). Just by
chanting Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, kṛṣṇa-rasa rises
spontaneously in the core of the heart. The holy name is
complete in itself and does not depend on the
construction of the words present in the mantras,
[according to the rules of Sanskrit grammar, suffixes
and prefixes are added to a name to effect a particular
meaning] where the names are somewhat altered e.g.
kṛṣṇāya for Kṛṣṇa or nārāyaṇāya for Lord Nārāyaṇa.
Whenever anyone on the spiritual platform utters the
name of Kṛṣṇa, the bliss of transcendental mellows
begins to arise. Nāma is always transcendental and fully
conscious—not lifeless like material syllables. Nāma is
only the mellow of transcendental consciousness
(caitanya-rasa). Nāma is ever liberated. It cannot be

                              33
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

produced by the material tongue. Only a person who has
tasted the mellow of nāma can understand this
explanation. One who imagines that nāma is lifeless is
not eligible to relish caitanya-rasa, nor is he
satisfied with this explanation.



One may argue that nāma, which we continuously chant, is
dependent on material syllables, so how can it be said
that nāma is not a material object and is eternally
liberated? Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī responds to this adverse
opinion as follows:



ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ



(Śrī-Bhakti-Rasāmṛta-Sindhu,

Eastern Division 2/234)



“The material senses can perceive a material object.
Kṛṣṇa-nāma is transcendental; therefore, it can never be
perceived by the material senses. The nāma that
initially manifests on the tongue is only a result of a
sphūrti—a pulsating of the transcendental senses of the
soul. However, at the time that the soul’s
transcendental (aprākṛta) tongue utters kṛṣṇa-nāma, the
parama-tattva appears in person upon the material tongue
and begins to dance. As the transcendental mellows of
devotion (aprākṛta-rasa) pervade the senses, the devotee
laughs out of bliss (ānanda), weeps and laments out of
affection (sneha), and dances out of love (prīti). In
this way, by means of the tongue, śrī kṛṣṇa-nāma-rasa
pervades all the senses.”



The nāma practiced during sādhana is but chāyā-nāma or
nāmābhāsa, a shadow of nāma (chanting which is covered
by clouds of ignorance). It is not the real name.
Continuous chanting of nāmābhāsa will eventually develop
into a taste for aprākṛta-nāma. Examples of this are
evident in the lives of Vālmīki and Ajāmila.



The jīva has no taste for nāma because of his offences.
When the jīva chants kṛṣṇa-nāma without offence, the
caitanya-rasa-vigraha (the fully conscious reservoir of
all pleasure), transcendental śrī hari-nāma, manifests
Himself within his heart. At that time, his heart
becomes joyful, streams of tears flow from his eyes, and

                              34
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                      5/5/2017

symptoms of sāttvika ecstasy appear in his body. The
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.3.24) states:



tad aśma-sāraṁ hṛdayaṁ batedaṁ

yad-gṛhyamāṇair hari-nāma-dheyaiḥ

na vikriyetātha yadā vikāro

netre jalaṁ gātra-ruheṣu harṣaḥ



“When someone chants hari-nāma, the following symptoms
manifest: he experiences a change of heart, tears flow
from his eyes, and his bodily hairs stand erect. When,
despite chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma, a person does not
experience any of these symptoms, it is to be understood
that his heart has become very hard due to offences.”



The primary duty of a sādhaka is to chant hari-nāma
without offence. Therefore, it is necessary to know how
many types of offences there are, and in this way he can
save himself from committing them. The scriptures
mention ten offences in relation to hari-nāma:



(1) To blaspheme devotees and saintly persons.

(2) To consider demigods like Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā
to be equal to Bhagavān or independent of Him.

(3) To neglect, disrespect, or disobey Śrī Guru, who
reveals the truth about hari-nāma.

(4) To criticize the bona-fide scriptures, which
describe the glories of hari-nāma.

(5) To consider the glories of hari-nāma to be an
exaggeration.

(6) To consider the meanings of hari-nāma revealed in
scripture to be imaginary; in other words, to consider
the names Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, etc., to be a product of
imagination.

(7) To commit sinful activities on the strength of
chanting hari-nāma.

(8) To equate chanting of hari-nāma with materially
auspicious activities recommended in the karma-kāṇḍa
sections of the Vedas.

(9) To instruct faithless persons on the glories of
hari-nāma.

(10) To not have faith in śrī kṛṣṇa-nāma despite hearing
His glories.


                              35
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017



(1) A person commits an offence to hari-nāma if he does
not believe in the saintly devotees and he blasphemes
the previous spiritual authorities (mahājanas), whose
characters are spotless. Thus, one who accepts hari-nāma
must first reject with his whole heart the tendency to
disrespect or disregard any Vaiṣṇava. If a doubt arises
about the activity of a Vaiṣṇava, one should try to
inquire about the cause of that behavior and avoid
criticizing him. Our primary duty is to have faith
(śraddhā) in the sādhus.



(2) To consider demigods like Lord Śiva to be non-
different from Bhagavān is nāmāparādha. Bhagavat-tattva
is one without a second. Demigods like Lord Śiva are not
independent of Śrī Bhagavān’s authority, nor are they
separate from Him. If a person honors demigods like Śiva
as guṇāvatāras (qualitative incarnations) or as devotees
of Bhagavān, he will not form the misconception that
they are independent of Him. Those who consider Mahādeva
(Śiva) an independent and separate demigod, worshipping
him alongside Viṣṇu, do not actually honor the true
glory of Mahādeva, who is the greatest among Vaiṣṇavas.
Such persons therefore become offensive to both Viṣṇu
and Śiva. Those who chant hari-nāma should reject this
kind of misconception.



(3) To disobey Śrī Gurudeva is an offence to the holy
name (nāmāparādha). He who instructs that nāma-tattva is
the highest transcendental truth should be accepted as a
bonafide spiritual master and a dear associate of
Bhagavān. One can attain firm faith in hari-nāma by
cultivating staunch bhakti for Śrī Guru.



(4) The bona fide scriptures should never be blasphemed.
Revealed scriptures like the Vedas describe bhāgavata-
dharma and detail the importance of śrī nāma. Therefore,
to blaspheme these scriptures is an offence to the holy
name. The glories of hari-nāma are described throughout
the Vedas. Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 7.131)
states:



vede rāmāyaṇe caiva

puraṇe bhārate tathā

ādāv ante ca madhye ca

hariḥ sarvatra gīyate



“Throughout all the Vedic literature, including the
Rāmāyaṇa, Purāṇas, and Mahābhārata, from the very
beginning to the end, as well as in the middle, only Śrī

                              36
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

Hari, the Supreme Lord, is described.”



How can a person develop love for hari-nāma if he
blasphemes bona fide scriptures? Some people consider
the statements of the scriptures regarding the
importance of hari-nāma to be simply exaggerated praise.
It is nāmāparādha to chant hari-nāma with such an
attitude, and those who do so will never achieve any
tangible result. They conclude that the scriptures
falsely praise the glories of hari-nāma, just as they
falsely praise karma-kāṇḍa, so that people will develop
a taste for it. Those who think like this are
unfortunate. On the other hand, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.1.11) describes the faith of fortunate persons:



etan nirvidyamānānām

icchatām akuto-bhayam

yogināṁ nṛpa nirṇītaṁ

harer namānukīrtanam



“A yogī thinks that by obtaining detachment from the
world he can become free from all fear, and concludes
that his wholesale duty is to chant hari-nāma. Persons
who have such faith can achieve the result of hari-
nāma.”



(5) Some people do not understand the difference between
nāmābhāsa and nāma. They believe that nāma is only a
combination of syllables that will definitely grant
results whether one has faith or not. They use the life
and character of Ajāmila as an example, quoting:



sāṅketyaṁ pārihāsyaṁ vā

stobhaṁ helanam eva vā

vaikuṇṭha-nāma-grahaṇam

aśeṣāgha-haraṁ viduḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.2.14)



“One who chants hari-nāma is immediately freed from the
reactions to unlimited sins, even if he chants
indirectly (to indicate something else), jokingly, for
musical entertainment, or neglectfully. This is
concluded by all the learned scholars of the

                              37
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

scriptures.”



(6) Previously, hari-nāma has been described as the
conscious embodiment of spiritual rasa, caitanya-rasa-
vigraha, which cannot be perceived by the material
senses. This proves that it is not possible to achieve
the results of chanting when one commits offenses to the
name. He who chants without faith does not achieve the
result of chanting; rather, as a result of chanting, he
may attain some faith in nāma within a short period.
Faithless persons, who believe that nāma is a limb of
karma-kāṇḍa, propagate that it is only a material
syllable and therefore equal to other names. They are
conditioned souls and offenders (nāmāparādhīs).
Vaiṣṇavas diligently endeavor to avoid this offence.



(7) Some people believe that by taking shelter of
harināma, they have attained a cheap remedy for the
results of all their sins. With this idea they think
that they can steal, perform acts of fraud, act
illicitly, and then chant hari-nāma to eradicate all
their misdeeds. A person who believes this is certainly
a nāmāparādhī (offender to nāma). One who has once
tasted the transcendental mellows of hari-nāma will
never again become attached to temporary material
objects.



(8) Some believe in pious activities (karma) such as
performing yajña, giving in charity, behaving according
to dharma, and visiting holy places. They also include
the chanting of nāma as a pious activity, and therefore
become offenders to the holy name (nāmāparādhīs). Nāma
is always transcendental, whereas all pious activities
are material. Thus, pious activities are foreign to
nāma. Anyone who considers nāma to be equivalent to
pious activities becomes indifferent to nāma and cannot
relish the rasa emanating from the holy name (nāma-
rasa). There is a vast difference between hari-nāma and
pious activity, just as there is a contrast between
diamonds and glass.



(9) One who instructs faithless persons about hari-nāma
or gives them the mantra is also a nāmāparādhī. It is
useless to give a string of pearls to a hog. Rather,
such behavior demonstrates disregard to the pearls and
is an insult to them. Similarly, it is extremely
improper to give instruction on nāma to a faithless
person. It is wise to first make an effort to develop
his faith, and then instruct him on hari-nāma. Those who
act as guru and give instructions on hari-nāma to
faithless persons will definitely fall down—because they
are committing nāmāparādha.



(10) If a person does not have exclusive faith in hari-

                              38
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt                    5/5/2017

nāma even after hearing its extensive glories, and if he
is still attached to or dependent on sādhanas such as
karma, jñāna, or yoga, then he is an offender to the
holy name. Thus, hari-nāma will not arise unless we
avoid nāmāparādha. Upon seeing the miseries of the jīva,
the deliverer of Kali-yuga, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
instructs us with a compassionate heart:



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

(Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 3)



“By thinking oneself to be even lower than straw in the
street, being more tolerant than a tree, not accepting
honor but giving honor to everyone, a jīva becomes
eligible to chant hari-nāma.”



The primary meaning of this verse is that one must chant
hari-nāma with proper conduct. One who considers himself
more lowly and fallen than anyone else never criticizes
sādhus nor disregards demigods like Lord Śiva. He
differentiates, but with respect. He never disregards
guru, blasphemes the bona fide scriptures, or doubts the
glories of hari-nāma. He never combines false
speculation with dry arguments to equate nirguṇa-brahma
with the name of ‘Hari’, nor does he commit sins on the
strength of the holy name. He does not accept pious
activities to be on an equal level with hari-nāma. He
never gives hari-nāma to faithless persons, and he does
not have even a scent of disbelief in nāma. He
constantly endeavors to be aloof from the ten types of
nāmāparādha. He remains a well-wisher even to those who
ridicule or offend him. Even though he carries out his
worldly duties, he does not possess the false ego of
being the enjoyer or the doer. Thinking himself to be a
servant of the world, he serves the whole world.



When a qualified person chants hari-nāma, the spiritual
world that is situated in the core of his heart radiates
transcendental light which, like a thunderbolt, pierces
the shroud of illusion enveloping all the jīvas in the
material creation, thus keeping the darkness of māyā far
away. Therefore, O great souls! Constantly perform hari-
nāma-kīrtana without offence. There is no shelter for
the jīvas other than hari-nāma. If you take shelter of
jñāna and karma, trying to save yourself from drowning
in this ocean of material existence, you should know it
is as useless as taking shelter of a piece of straw to
cross a great ocean. Therefore, accepting the shelter of
the great ship of the mahā-mantra, cross this ocean of

                              39
Vaisnava-siddhanta-mala.txt        5/5/2017

material existence.



Table of Contents

Chapter One

Chapter Two

Chapter Three

Chapter Four

Chapter Five

Chapter Six

Chapter Seven

Chapter Eight

Chapter Nine

Chapter Ten




Table of Contents

Chapter One

Chapter Two

Chapter Three

Chapter Four

Chapter Five

Chapter Six

Chapter Seven

Chapter Eight

Chapter Nine

Chapter Ten




                              40
