Way-of-Love.txt                                    5/8/2017

śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ



The Way of Love




* * *




A booklet on the real meaning of love, the essence of
true spirituality




His Divine Grace

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




For more eBook titles on bhakti-yoga by Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, please visit




www.purebhakti.com




© 2014 Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights
Reserved.



To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/



Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

Digital Edition:

ePub: ISBN 978-1-63316-065-1

Kindle: ISBN 978-1-63316-067-5


                           1
Way-of-Love.txt                                 5/8/2017

Printed Edition: ISBN 978-1-935428-75-6

Seventh Edition: 2013, 30,000 copies

Painting of Kṛṣṇa reclining with cows © Bhaktivedanta
Book Trust, Intl. Used with permission. www.krishna.com

Painting of Kṛṣṇa standing and playing flute and
painting of Gaura-nitāi © Śyāmarānī dāsī. Used with
permission.

Photo of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja ©
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Intl. Used with permission.
www.krishna.com

All quotes by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja ©
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Intl.

ePub Encoding • Sanātana dāsa




Dedication


I beg the mercy of my Gurudeva, nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja. I offer thousands of humble obeisances unto
his lotus feet, and the same humble obeisances unto the
lotus feet of my śikṣā-guru, nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja.

In the present day, it was my śikṣā-guru who unlocked
the treasure of Vedic wisdom for the entire world. The
key to the treasure is in his hands and in my Gurudeva’s
hands. They have given me their key, and they have
ordered me to share that treasure with you all.




Tridaṇḍi-bhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa




Many participated in completing the publication of this
booklet in the role of editors, editorial advisors,
designers, artists, typists, transcribers, proof-readers
and technical assistants. They include: Śrīpāda
Bhaktivedānta Mādhava Mahārāja, Śrīpāda Bhaktivedānta
Vaikhanas Mahārāja, Atula-kṛṣṇa dāsa, Ānītā dāsī,
Bhūdhara dāsa, Brajanātha dāsa, Dhanañjaya dāsa,
Giridhārī dāsa, Gaurāṅgi dāsī, Gurūttama dāsa, Jaya-
gopāla dāsa, Mahaprābhu dāsa, Nanda-kiśora dāsa,
Nandimukhi dāsī, Nāndinī dāsī, Premavatī dāsī, Rādhā-
kānta dāsa, Śānti dāsī, Sudarśana dāsa, Sundara-gopāla
dāsa, Śyāmarāṇī dāsī, Vaijayantī-mālā dāsī, Vasanti dāsī
and Viśvambhara dāsa.


                           2
Way-of-Love.txt                                   5/8/2017




Special thanks to all the book distributors for helping
to bring this publication to our respected readers.




Contents


Dedication

Guru-paramparā Images

Preface




There is Only One Family

Unity in Diversity

Love All Creatures

Love has a Form

Without that Love

The Search for Happiness

A Perfect Question

The Path to Happiness

Mantra of Divine Love




About the Author

Book List

Websites




Preface


The purpose of    this booklet is to present the words of
those who have    realized the sacred truths revealed in
ancient Indian    scriptures called the Vedas. The word
Veda literally    means “the final conclusion on all topics
related to the    transcendental world and all topics

                              3
Way-of-Love.txt                                 5/8/2017

related to this world, both ordinary and extraordinary.”

The Vedas were compiled thousands of years ago by self-
realized saints whose hearts were melting with affection
for the suffering souls in this world. Such saints are
blessed with pure understanding of the Supreme Truth and
the ultimate purpose of life. The Way of Love is a
transcription of a discourse given by such a self-
realized personality, the revered Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, whose life is unconditionally
dedicated to the ultimate happiness of others.

In this Preface, we would like to share with you the
words of another great saint, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja, famous throughout the world as Śrīla
Prabhupāda, who is intimately related with Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja as an instructing guru and a
dear friend. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja regards
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja as a main inspiration
for his regularly traveling the surface of the globe and
teaching the way of love. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja writes:

“The basic principle of the living condition is that we
have a general propensity to love someone. No one can
live without loving someone else. This propensity is
present in every living being. Even an animal like a
tiger has this loving propensity at least in a dormant
stage, and it is certainly present in the human beings.
The missing point, however, is where to repose our love
so that everyone can become happy. At the present moment
the human society teaches one to love his country or
family or his personal self, but there is no information
about where to repose the loving propensity so that
everyone can become happy.

“In the primary stage a child loves his parents, then
his brothers and sisters, and as he daily grows up he
begins to love his family, society, community, country,
nation or even the whole human society. But the loving
propensity is not satisfied even by loving all human
society. That loving propensity remains imperfectly
fulfilled until we know who is the supreme beloved. Our
loving propensity expands just as a vibration of light
or air expands, but we do not know where it ends.”

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja continues to explain
the problem we face – not knowing how to love. He
explains the science of loving every living being
perfectly by the process of loving the Supreme Being,
known in the Vedas as Kṛṣṇa:

“We have failed to create peace and harmony in human
society, even by such great attempts as the United
Nations, because we do not know the right method. The
method is very simple.

“If we learn how to love Kṛṣṇa, then it is very easy to
immediately and simultaneously love every living being.
It is like pouring water on the root of a tree or
supplying food to one’s stomach. The method of pouring
water on the root of a tree or supplying foodstuffs to
the stomach is universally scientific and practical, as
every one of us has experienced. Everyone knows well

                           4
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017

that when we eat something, or in other words, when we
put foodstuffs in the stomach, the energy created by
such action is immediately distributed throughout the
whole body. Similarly, when we pour water on the root,
the energy thus created is immediately distributed
throughout the entirety of even the largest tree. It is
not possible to water the tree part by part, nor is it
possible to feed the different parts of the body
separately.”

“The root cause of our dissatisfaction is that our
dormant loving propensity has not been fulfilled despite
our great advancement in the materialistic way of life.
We are watering all parts of the tree, but missing the
tree’s root. We are trying to keep our body fit by all
means, but we are neglecting to supply foodstuffs to the
stomach.

“Missing the Supreme Self means missing one’s self also.
Self-realization and realization of the Supreme Soul,
known as Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the all-attractive reservoir of
love, go together simultaneously. For example, seeing
oneself in the morning means seeing the sunrise also;
without seeing the sunshine no one can see himself.
Relations of the soul, established in relation with the
Supreme Soul, are factual relations. The bodily relation
is the cause of material bondage, but the relation of
the soul is the cause of freedom. This relation of the
soul to the soul can be established by the via medium of
the relation with the Supersoul. Seeing in the darkness
is not seeing. But seeing by the light of the sun means
to see the sun and everything else that was unseen in
the darkness.”

As is true with all Vedic literature, this booklet is
meant to teach us how to “turn the one switch that will
immediately brighten everything, everywhere.” All the
histories told herein actually took place. Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja has taken them from the parts
of the Vedas known as the Purāṇas and Upaniṣads.

The names of all the personalities herein are in the
ancient Sanskrit language. Following the tradition of
our spiri-tual preceptors we use standard diacritical
markings to indicate the pronunciation of Sanskrit
words. Pronounce ā like a in father, ī like ea in neat,
ū like oo in root, ṛ like ri in rip, ṁ and ṅ like ng in
hung, ś and ṣ like sh in shy, and c like ch in chap.




The editor




The Way of Love


Misplaced Love


                           5
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017


There was once a very qualified and beautiful young king
named Bhartrihari, who was expert in all the arts. King
Bhartrihari married at the age of twenty-five years, and
he adored his beautiful newly-wedded wife. Eager to
please her, he presented her with a jeweled necklace,
the value of which would be over a million dollars by
today’s standards. He placed the necklace around her
neck with his own hands, embraced her and said, “Most
dearly beloved, this necklace is very precious. Please
always keep it with you.”

King Bhartrihari was greatly attracted to his wife, but
she had no such attraction to him. Rather, she was
attracted to her husband’s commander-in-chief, who was
also extremely handsome. Therefore, a few days after
receiving the excellent necklace, she gave it to the
commander-in-chief, desiring to please him.

Although the queen was very attached to the commander-
in-chief, he did not feel the same way about her. He was
attached to a prostitute. A few days after receiving the
necklace, he presented it to that prostitute, desiring
to please her. The prostitute did not feel the same way
about the commander-in-chief, however, for she was
attached to the king. One day she presented that very
necklace to the king, desiring to please him. Seeing the
necklace, the king became distressed and asked her from
where she had gotten it. Frightened, she did not reply.
The incensed king said, “If you don’t tell me the truth
I will cut off your head.” The prostitute then revealed
the truth of the matter to the king, who left her and
took the necklace to the commander-in-chief.

King Bhartrihari asked his commander-in-chief, “Where
did you get this? If you tell me the truth I will not
harm you, but if you try to conceal it from me I will
have your head.” The commander-in-chief revealed the
truth to him, and at that moment the king realized that
there is no true love in this world. He at once made up
his mind to give up all his worldly attachments. He left
his palace, his kingdom and his opulent attire, and he
became a very famous renunciant and spiritualist.

[King Bhartrihari’s grief and anger arose from his
affection that had turned sour. This was caused by his
not knowing that in order to love, one must first
embrace the Supreme Love. The misery he tasted due to
misunderstanding that Supreme Love, God, is common in
this world. Some of us think that He does not exist,
some think He is formless and without qualities, and
some think there are different Divinities or Gods for
those of different faiths. The following reveals how
anyone can become free from all suffering caused by
animosity, envy and quarrelling by knowing that single
one Divine Reality. – ed]




There is Only One Family



                           6
Way-of-Love.txt                                 5/8/2017

All of us are in the family of one God. It is not that
there is one God in England, another in America, and
still another in India. The Christians, Muslims and
Hindus are not worshiping different Gods. The names
Allah, Brahma, Jehovah, Kṛṣṇa and Yahweh refer to the
same God, called by different names according to
differences in language and culture.

If we love the same one God, why do we quarrel? We
quarrel because we don’t know what real love is. If we
have true love and affection for the one Supreme Lord,
we will naturally love each other. There is a saying,
“God is love and love is God.” And in Indian Vedic
culture there is a saying, “All should be happy.”

Jesus also taught this philosophy. He went to India when
he was about sixteen years old, and he visited many
places of pilgrimage, like Vṛndāvana, Ayodhyā, South
India and Jagannātha Purī. In Purī he saw the deities of
Jagannātha, Baladeva and Subhadrā, and he heard Lord
Jagannātha (meaning “Lord of the Universe”) addressed as
Kṛṣṇa. In this part of India, the name Kṛṣṇa is
pronounced Kroosna. Because of different languages,
Greek and Hebrew, this name became Kroosta, then Krista,
and now it is pronounced Christ. Kṛṣṇa, Kroosna, Krista
and now Christ – they are the same.

In this universe there is only one God, and He is not
Russian, English, German or Spanish. He knows all
languages without difficulty, but there is actually no
need of knowing them. There is only one real language in
the entire world, and that language is called love. Eyes
can speak that language, ears and hands can speak and
understand it, and a glowing face can tell everything.
God is one, and He is the embodiment of Love. Kṛṣṇa is
the original name of God, given in the ancient Vedas,
and it means “the all-attractive reservoir of pleasure.”
All other names, like Supersoul, Buddha, Allah and God,
are included within Him.




Unity in Diversity


Although we are all parts and parcels of the same
Supreme Lord, we have divided up this Earth, declaring,
“This is my country! This is your country!”

Even though we are all individuals, we all depend upon
the same sun and we all breathe the same air. This is
the principle of unity in diversity. Unity refers to the
fact that we are all parts and parcels of the same
Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, the father of all; and diversity
refers to our eternal individual natures. Because this
is the eternal reality, we will only find peace and
happiness in this reality. Unity in diversity will have
no meaning if people have no faith in the Supreme God,
or love for Him and all living entities.




                           7
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017



Love All Creatures


It is often thought that humans are the only members of
God’s family, but this is not true. He creates all
creatures. They are all His children, so why should we
not love them all? The saying “All should be happy” does
not only apply to humans.

The Supreme Lord has created cows, and those cows freely
and indiscriminately give milk to all. In the Vedas the
cow is referred to as go mātā, Mother Cow, because she
nourishes us with her own milk. It is not stated
anywhere in the Bible that we may kill the cow, or any
animal. In the original Aramaic language of the Bible,
the word “brosimus” has been used more than twenty
times. “Brosimus” means “food” and it has been
translated as “meat”. In Old English “meat” did not mean
“flesh”; it meant “food”. But the English language has
changed, and today most people wrongly believe that the
Holy Bible supports the eating of animal flesh.




The Old Testament clearly states, “Thou shall not kill.”
This means we should neither kill humans nor animals.
The Koran also does not sanction the slaughtering and
eating of cows. The Supreme Lord has not created animals
for us to eat. For this purpose He has created fruits,
roots, milk, butter, grains and vegetables. He will not
be happy if we harm any of His children, what to speak
of killing our own mother.

Trees, creepers, hogs and insects are also children of
the one Supreme Lord. In Indian Vedic culture it is said
that one should not walk on a field after it has been
plowed and the seeds have been sown there, for those
seeds may die. We should not give pain or suffering to
any living being.




We are all children of the Supreme Lord, who is the
personi-fication of supreme happiness and the reservoir
of supreme happiness for all others. We are part and
parcel of that Happiness. The only difference between
the Supreme Lord and ourselves is that He is unlimited
and we are minute. We are qualitatively one with Him,
but unfortunately we have forgotten who we are. We
should try to realize this truth. We must not quarrel
with those of other religious faiths. The one true
religion of all souls is love, and that religion is one
without a second. We should love God and also each
other, and in this way people can live happily in this
world.




                           8
Way-of-Love.txt                                 5/8/2017



Love has a Form


The Vedas explain that the Supreme has a transcendental
form and personal qualities, and He performs
extraordinary pastimes. He is all-attractive and the
possessor of all potency. He is indivisible and one
without a second. Although He is one, and although He is
everything, He is a person. God: G – generator, the
generator of this world; O – operator, the opera-tor of
this world, and D – destroyer, the destroyer of this
world. He nourishes and supports the entire universe.
Vedic sages like Śrīla Vyāsadeva, Nārada Muni and Lord
Brahmā have told us that He has a very beautiful form
and many millions of transcendental qualities.

If a father has a form, his son will also have a form.
If the father has no form or qualities, the son will
neither have form nor qualities, nor can he even exist.

It may appear that God is sometimes described as
formless in certain scriptures, but when such scriptures
use the word “formless”, they mean that He has no
material form, no material qualities and no material
features. His shape and features are spiritual. He is
all-powerful, and therefore He has the power to have a
form. If He were without form, qualities, power and
mercy, He would be nothing. He would be unable to help
us or hear our prayers, what to speak of giving us
eternal bliss. We don’t believe in a God devoid of
mercy, power and qualities. If He were without
transcendental qualities such as mercy, what value and
purpose would there be in worshiping Him?

Both the Bible and the Koran state that He has a form.
The Bible states, “God created man in His own image.” If
He has no image, or form, why does the Bible say this?
His image is transcendental; it is not mortal. He has a
spiritual body from which He created man. It is also
said that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. If the son has
form, then his father must also have form. In fact, He
has the most beautiful form. He has all good qualities
and He is complete with all potencies.

The Koran states: “Inallah kalaka mein suratihi – Allah,
or Kudda, has form, and from that form He has fashioned
man.” The word suratihi means ‘form’ and the name Allah
means ‘the greatest’. All universes and all creation are
contained within Him, and there is nothing equal to
Allah in greatness. The Vedic conception of God confirms
this understanding and also says that the Supreme Being,
Lord Kṛṣṇa, is both the greatest of the great and the
smallest of the small.

The words ‘formless’, ‘without qualities’ and ‘without
features’, used in scriptures to describe God, have come
from the root words ‘form’, ‘qualities’ and ‘features’.
Without the concept of some-thing having form, there can
be no concept of something being devoid of form. It must
therefore be concluded that the Supreme Original Entity
has form, qualities and features; and one of those
qualities must be mercy. He is so merciful that He

                           9
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017

created this entire world – to fulfill our foolish
desire to enjoy separately from Him.




Without that Love


Once, a man in a forest heard the sound of a tiger. As
he ran in fear, his eyes darted here and there looking
for shelter. Finally he came across a ‘blind well’, a
well that is no longer in use. Grass and plants had
grown over that well and a tree grew beside it. Taking
help from two branches of the tree, the man lowered
himself into the well, comforted by the thought that he
was beyond the tiger’s reach. As he descended the well,
however, he saw beneath him many snakes. The snakes
raised their hoods and hissed, ready to bite him.

As he hung from the two branches he realized that his
predicament had only increased. At the bottom of the
well there were many poisonous snakes waiting to bite
him and at the top a ferocious tiger waited to eat him.
He was suffering great anxiety.

Then, two rats – one black and one white – began gnawing
the branches onto which he held. It was only a question
of time before the branches would be eaten through and
he would fall into the pit of snakes. To escape this
predicament, he had to either climb out and be eaten by
the tiger or descend into the well and be bitten by the
snakes. Whatever he chose to do, his fate would be
gruesome.

In this very dangerous situation, the man suddenly
noticed a honeycomb on the branch of the tree. Because
the tree was shaking, some honey was dripping and it
just happened to be dripping very close to his face.
Taking this opportunity to enjoy, he stuck out his
tongue and took that honey into his mouth. He began to
relish the flavor, thinking, “Oh, how sweet! How sweet!”
Feeling some happiness, he completely forgot the danger
he was in.

All the components of this analogy represent our own
condi-tion. The man in this story exemplifies all souls
who are attached to this world. We are in a dangerous
situation, as we may die at any moment, and there is no
way for us to be saved by our material endeavors. The
snakes represent our many problems, coming at us one
after another like waves in an ocean. We think, “Oh,
this is the last of my problems. I will be happy as soon
as this problem is solved.” But sometimes the next wave
is larger still, and sometimes many waves, or problems,
come at once – five or six at a time. At the top of the
well stands the tiger, who represents death, which is
waiting for every one of us in this world.

The two branches represent the reactions to our fruitive
activities – good and bad, pious and impious. We live
our lives experiencing the reactions of our pious and
impious activities. Combined together, these reactions

                           10
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017

comprise the duration of our life, and that duration is
being taken away moment by moment. The black rat
represents nighttime and the white rat daytime. We are
very happy when another day comes and goes, but actually
the coming and going of days only means that the
duration of our life is being gnawed away.

Amidst so many problems and dangers one drop of honey
falls on our tongues, and this drop is likened to the
momentary happiness we may feel with friends and
relatives of this world.




The Search for Happiness


All living creatures are making a great endeavor,
struggling, to attain real everlasting happiness.
However, as the Vedas explain, worldly things cannot
give us happiness. Regardless of the position a person
may hold, he or she remains unfulfilled. Even if one is
wealthy, young, beautiful, educated, famous and
influential, he still looks for something more to make
him happy.

Even the presidents and prime ministers of great nations
remain unsatisfied. Throughout history it has been
revealed that rich and powerful persons, like Napoleon
and the kings and queens of England, France and Germany,
were deeply unhappy despite their seemingly advantageous
positions. In modern times, we can see this in the lives
of Princess Diana and Bill Clinton, to name a few. The
little happiness we receive in this world is momentary
and mixed with suffering. It is not continuous and
eternal, nor is it complete and pure. From the lowest
material planet to the highest, there are so many types
of misery and no real eternal happiness.

No soul identifying with a material body can be happy.
This human life is meant for finding a way out of the
prison of this body, which is destined to grow old and
die. We want to be happy by satisfying our material
bodies, but old age very quickly overtakes us and we
lament. The material happiness we receive is not really
happiness; it is condensed misery. We do not understand
that the soul, which is different from the body and
mind, is spiritual, eternal, and full of knowledge and
bliss. We can therefore only be truly satisfied by that
which is also spiritual, eternal, and full of knowledge
and bliss – the Supreme Personality of Godhead and our
loving relationship with Him.

Nowadays we are making many inventions and discoveries
in areas such as medicine, transportation and
communication. We can easily travel from one side of the
world to the other in just a few hours. By sitting in
our living room we can see what is happening on the
other side of the world. We can watch cricket being
played in Australia or India and we can see the
President of America speaking in the White House in
Washington. And, if a person’s eyes are defective,

                           11
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017

surgeons can repair them with parts of eyes taken from a
dead body.

However, despite these and other advances, people are
suffering more than ever before. We are still not able
to prevent old age and death; and we cannot prevent war
and terrorism, or the spread of disease. New diseases
continue to appear. The advances in science and
technology have not brought us happiness. Rather, we
have become more fearful, materialistic and greedy.

Why is modern science failing us? The reason is that it
is not, in fact, very developed. Scientists cannot see
the soul, which has a transcendental form; and they
cannot even see the mind, which is material. We think
that we are very advanced due to developments in
technology, but all we have done is increase the needs
of the material body and neglect the needs of the soul.
We do not care to love the Supreme Lord, and thus we do
not have any real love and affection for each other.

We trust our dogs and cats more than we trust our
families and friends. Husbands and wives do not remain
together and divorce is common. Parents reject their
children and children reject their parents. Almost
everyone is interested only in gratifying his own body
and mind.

Persons who want to control the endless chain of birth,
disease, old age and death can learn to do so from the
ancient Vedic culture. Studying modern scientific
knowledge will not help. When scientific knowledge
develops to a more sophisticated level, people may
finally be able to control old age and death. But to
attain this level, modern society must learn from our
Vedic culture.




A Perfect Question


The Vedas tell an ancient history. There was once a
self-realized soul named Yājñavalkya, and he served in
the council of the great and celebrated King Janaka. He
was very learned in the Vedas and he was fully aware of
the presence of the soul and Supersoul within the body.

Yājñavalkya had two wives, Maitreyi and Kātyāyanī. Once,
in his old age, he called his two wives and said to
them: “We have lived as householders for many years. I
have amassed vast amounts of gold and many cows, and I
have also given each of you several children. I now want
to divide all my property between you so that you will
be happy for the rest of your lives. After I have done
this, please permit me to go to the forest to meditate
deeply on the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”

Hearing this, Kātyāyanī became happy and said: “Your
goal, which is very wonderful, is to meditate on the
Supreme Lord. You are my husband, and I shall assist you
in doing this.”

                           12
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017


Maitreyi gave a different response. She said, “I have a
question, and after you have answered it you can go with
a glad heart. You are going to the forest because you
are not satisfied with all the gold and property you
have accumulated during your life, or with your wives,
children and friends. So do you think these things will
then make us happy?”

Yājñavalkya replied: “You are truly my devoted wife. By
asking this question you have greatly pleased me. The
answer to this question is discussed in all the Vedas.
Gold and property cannot give real happiness. Position
in society, learning, reputation, friendship and family
can never make one truly happy. Money and whatever it
may buy in this world cannot give us what we hanker for.
We are parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord and He is
the reservoir of all happiness. Therefore we can find
happiness only in Him. To serve Him is actual happiness,
whereas the happiness we taste in this world is minute
and also perishable. Lord Kṛṣṇa is an ocean of
transcendental tasteful relationships and the embodiment
of supreme happiness. He alone can satisfy us; so I wish
to go now to the forest to attain Him.”




The Path to Happiness


If we want to be truly happy, we must engage in the
practice of serving God. In the Vedas this process is
called bhakti-yoga, or connecting with the Supreme Lord
by serving Him. By considering His happiness first, a
person automatically becomes happy and peaceful. He does
not harm other creatures, be they animals or humans, and
as a result he can live peacefully with all.

Devotion to God has three stages of development: the
stage of practice, the stage of awakening spiritual
ecstasy, and the stage of fully blossomed ecstasy called
pure love.

To achieve pure love, we begin at the stage of practice.
In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy, called Kali-yuga,
the most powerful spiritual practice and the best method
to find happiness is to chant the name of the Supreme
Lord. His name is non-different from Him and it contains
all of His potencies as well as His sweet forms and
pastimes. This will be realized fully at the stage of
pure love. Chanting the holy name of God cleanses the
heart of all unhealthy desires and tendencies, leaving
one feeling tranquil and connected to Him.

The Vedic text named Kali-santarana Upaniṣad states: “In
this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of
deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There
is no other way. There is no other way. There is no
other way.” The names of the Lord can be chanted as
follows:

Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa

                           13
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017


Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare

Hare Rāma Hare Rāma

Rāma Rāma Hare Hare




Mantra of Divine Love


Water, air and practically everything is polluted these
days. As the oceans are polluted by poisons, thus
poisoning both the fish and the fish eaters, material
sound vibration also pollutes and poisons the
atmosphere. People spray poisons to kill insects, thus
poisoning the grains and those who eat them. Similarly,
material sound vibration in the form of abuses,
criticism of others, quarrelling and so forth, and in
fact any material vibration, pollutes the minds, senses
and hearts of everyone throughout the world. We can
counteract this pollution and pain by chanting the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mantra.

An example may be given of a big pond. If you take a
stone and throw it into a pond, the waves that are
created will touch all edges of the pond. This universe
is like that pond. Chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa Hare Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare
creates many waves of spiritual vibration. Those waves
touch everything – up to the end of the world – moving
here and there and purifying the entire universe from
all pollution.

Lord Kṛṣṇa is inconceivably powerful. He can create the
entire universe in a second and then destroy it, and
again He can create many worlds. He has invested all His
mercy, power and opulence in His names, and thus they
are also unlimitedly powerful. They very quickly travel
throughout the universe as spiritual sound vibrations,
and the pollution gradually disappears.

Trees, creepers, animals and insects cannot speak. They
cannot understand our language. Still, everyone – not
only humans, but all creatures throughout this universe
– will be touched by the powerful holy name, whether
they are aware of it or not. If one touches fire
knowingly or unknowingly, he will feel its effects.
Similarly, these holy names will inspire and purify all
living beings, whether they are aware or not. Trees,
grasses and humans all become fortunate when they hear
about Kṛṣṇa, and even the creatures in the jungles are
gradually liberated from suffering.

If we chant loudly, all our senses will be purified, and
there will be nothing to criticize and no unhappy
memories. By material endeavors we cannot control the
unhappy and unbeneficial thoughts that enter our minds,
but they are conquered very easily by chanting.
Gradually our hearts will be cleansed by such chanting,
and then we will realize that our real self-interest –

                           14
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017

the Soul of our souls – is Lord Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, if we
serve Him, we and the entire world are benefited.

“God is Love and Love is God”

Chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa Mantra and be Happy




About Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


On the sacred and auspicious day of Maunī Amāvasyā,
1921, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
took his divine birth in a devout Vaiṣṇava family in
Tivārīpura, in the state of Bihar, India.

In February, 1946, he met his gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and his life of
complete and exemplary dedication to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism,
or the path of kṛṣṇa-bhakti in the line of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, began to manifest.

He accompanied his gurudeva on his extensive preaching
tours throughout India, actively assisting him in
propagating the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu for
the eternal benefit of the living entities in this
world. This included regularly hosting the thousands of
pilgrims attending the yearly circumambulation of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, the appear-ance place of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the appearance
place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

His gurudeva had instructed him to translate the
writings of prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas into Hindi, a
task he assiduously assumed throughout his entire life
and which resulted in the publication of nearly fifty
Hindi sacred texts. Later, most of these invaluable
masterpieces were translated into English and other
major languages of the world.

For many years, he traveled throughout India to spread
the message of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, and it was for this
end, also, that in 1996, he journeyed abroad. During the
next fourteen years, he circled the globe more than
thirty times. Whether he was in India or abroad, his
preaching always bore the distinctive characteristic of
boldly unmasking any misconception obscuring the
specific purposes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s advent,
in strict adherence to the desire of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda and in
perfect congruence with the conceptions of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s foremost follower.
Thus, in present times, in upholding the glorious tenets
of the Gauḍīya sampradāya, he performed the function of
a true ācārya.

At the age of ninety years, on December 29, 2010, he
concluded his pastimes in this world at Cakratīrtha, in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma. The following day, in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, Śrī Gaurasundara’s fully empowered
emissary, the very embodiment of His unique compassion,

                           15
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017

was given samādhi. He will never cease to reside in his
divine instructions and in the hearts of those who are
devoted to him.




English titles published by

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


Arcana-dīpikā • Beyond Nīrvāṇa • Bhagavad-gītā •
Bhajana-rahasya • Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindu-bindu • Bhakti-
rasāyana • Bhakti-tattva-viveka • Brahma-saṁhitā •
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Vol. 2.1)• Butter Thief • Caitanya
Mahāprabhu – The Original Form of Godhead • Camatkāra-
candrikā – A Moonbeam of Complete Astonishment •
Controlled by Love • Dāmodara-līlā-mādhurī •
Dāmodarāṣṭakam • Discerning the True Sentiments of the
Soul • Distinctive Contribution of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī •
Essence of All Advice • Essence of Bhagavad-gītā •
Eternal Function of the Soul • Fearless Prince • Five
Essential Essays • Gauḍīya Gītī-Guccha • Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism versus Sahajiyāism • Gaura-vāṇī Pracāriṇe •
Gift of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu • Gīta-govinda • Going
Beyond Vaikuṇṭha • Gopī-gīta • Guru-devatātmā •
Happiness in a Fool’s Paradise • Harināma Mahā-mantra •
Harmony • Hidden Path of Devotion • Impressions of
Bhakti • Jaiva-dharma • Journey of the Soul • Letters
From America • Maharṣi Durvāsā and Śrī Durvāsā-āśrama •
Manaḥ-śikṣa • My Śikṣā-guru and Priya-bandhu •
Navadvīpa-dhāma Māhātmya • Navadvīpa-dhāma Parikramā •
Nectar of Govinda-līlā • Origin of Ratha-yātrā • Our
Eternal Nature • Our Gurus: One in Siddhanta, One at
Heart • Pinnacle of Devotion • Prabandhāvalī • Prema-
sampuṭa • Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā • Rāga-vartma-
candrikā • Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda • Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ
• Secrets of the Undiscovered Self • Secret Truths of
the Bhāgavatam • Shower of Love • Śikṣāṣṭaka • Śiva-
tattva • Ślokāmṛtam • Ślokāmṛtam-bindu • Soul of Book
Distribution • Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
– His Life and Teachings • Their Lasting Relation • To
Be Controlled by Love • True Conception of Guru-tattva •
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa • Upadeśāmṛta • Utkalikā-vallarī
• Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā • Veṇu-gīta • Śrī Vraja-
maṇḍala Parikramā • Walking with a Saint (2007, 2008,
2009) • Way of Love • Rays of the Harmonist (periodical)




Gaudiya Vedanta Publications (GVP)


publishes, preserves and distributes the books of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. For more
information on the contents of these books, please
visit:




                              16
Way-of-Love.txt                                   5/8/2017



www.purebhakti.com

for news, updates, and free downloads of books, lectures
and bhajanas.




www.purebhakti.tv

to watch and hear classes online, or get links and
scheduled updates for live webcasts




www.harikatha.com

to receive, by email, the lectures and videos of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja on his
world tours




If you are interested to know more about the books,
lectures, audio recordings, videos, teachings, and the
international society of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, please contact us at

connectwithussoon@gmail.com




or find a center in your area on

www.purebhakti.com/contact-us




YOUR COMMENTS AND FEEDBACK

We humbly invite our readers to submit any errors they
may find in this publication at

www.purebhakti.com/gvp




YOUR SUPPORT

If you would like to support GVP’s publication,
preservation and distribution of Śrī Śrīmad

                              17
Way-of-Love.txt                                5/8/2017

Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s books, you
can:




sponsor the endowment fund of a printed book will assure
that when a book is first printed, there will always be
funding to keep that book in print. For more
information, please visit

www.mygvp.com




sponsor books for the GVP Book Distribution Program.
This program is a federally approved 501 c3 non-profit
religious organization that places Śrīla Gurudeva’s
books in stores, libraries, prisons, hospitals, and many
other locations. It makes the books available to all
people at no cost or low cost. For more information,
please visit

www.gvpbookdistribution.com




                              18
