                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ



When Kindness and Compassion Take a Form



* * *




A Glimpse of the Transcendental Life & Teachings of
nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja




Inspired by our beloved Gurudeva,

nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




© 2015 Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights
Reserved.



To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/



Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

Digital Edition:



ePub: ISBN 978-1-63316-138-2

Kindle: ISBN 978-1-63316-139-9

Printed Edition:

ISBN 978-1-63316-135-1

First Edition: 2,000 copies, September 2015

Photo of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja ©
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust, Intl. Used with permission.
www.krishna.com


                           1
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

Contributors



ePub Encoding

• Sanātana dāsa




Contents


Part One – Remembering the Transcendental Nature of
prapūjya-caraṇa aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja

His Birth and His Early Life in the Maṭha

His Sharp Intelligence from Boyhood and His Inclination
to Serve Vaiṣṇavas

Accepting Dīkṣā

Establishing Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti and Preaching
with Śrī Gurupāda-padma

Exemplary Vaiṣṇava-sevā

His Affection for Me

Śrī Bṛhad-mṛdaṅga Sevā

His Transcriptions Were Faultless

Referencing Ślokas in Service to the Sampradāya

Accepting Sannyāsa

A Living Gauḍīya Dictionary

Preaching in the Villages of Bengal

His Expertise in the Art of Speaking Sweetly while
Refuting Bogus Philosophies

His Compilation of the Transcendental Life of Śrīla
Gurudeva

A Strong Decision

An Ācārya in the Anugatya of His Godbrothers

Faith in his Godbrother

Advocating Bhajana in the Mood of Rādhā-dāsyam

Absorption in Vipralambha-bhajana

His Disappearance and Samādhi

The Ideal Vaiṣṇava

                              2
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt


Part Two – Self Assessment on the Disappearance Day of
Śrīla Guru-pāda-padma

Never Forget Śrī Guru

Śrī Guru – Our Constant Guide

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka – the Complete Process

Nothing Less than Absolute Happiness

Measuring Our Progress

Life’s Only Treasure

Part Three – Śrī Guru & Vaiṣṇavas Are Moved by Our
Emotions

About the Author

Book List

Our Websites




PART ONE


Remembering the Transcendental Nature of prapūjya-caraṇa
aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī
Mahārāja

by Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




His Birth and His Early Life in the Maṭha


I heard from the mouth of Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja’s
virtuous and learned mother, Śrīmatī Bhagavatī-devī,
that pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja was born on the Kṛṣṇa-
pakṣa-navamī in the month of Pauṣa (23 December) 1921,
in the village of Pilajaṅga in the Khulnā district of
East Bengal (Bangladesh). His childhood name was
Santoṣa. His father, Śrī Satiśacandra, took dīkṣā from
my most worshipful master, oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja.
After dīkśā his name became Śrī Sarveśvara dāsa
Ādhikārī. His mother was the disciple of the world
famous jagad-guru, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda
aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, and his paternal uncle was one of
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s first disciples, pūjyapāda Nārasiṁha
Mahārāja.

In 1930, during Śrīla Prabhupāda’s manifest pastime,
Santoṣa, who was about nine years old, accompanied his

                           3
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

mother to Māyāpura to attend the Śrī Gaura-pūrṇimā
festival at Śrī Caitanya Maṭha. On that occasion, his
mother offered him to the lotus feet of Śrīla
Prabhupāda, who entrusted him to the care of my
gurupāda-padma, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī, his dear-most
associate. My gurupāda-padma’s name then was Śrī Vinoda-
bihārī Brahmacārī Kṛtiratna. He enrolled Santoṣa in the
Śrī Bhaktivinoda Institute in Māyāpura. Śrī Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura Prabhupāda gave him harināma initiation and
later our gurudeva named him Śrī Sajjana Sevaka
Brahmacārī.




His Sharp Intelligence from Boyhood and His Inclination
to Serve Vaiṣṇavas


Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī’s intelligence was
extremely sharp, his speech was soft and sweet, and his
memory was perfect. He could commit to memory and
permanently retain whatever he read or heard, be it a
śloka or a lecture. Śrīla Gurudeva instructed him to
learn ślokas and told him that for every śloka he
memorized, he would give him a candy. In this way
Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī would learn ten to twenty
ślokas daily.

Although he was top of his class, he never neglected his
services in the maṭha. He would collect banana leaves to
be used as plates, wash them and lay them out for the
Vaiṣṇavas’ prasāda. During prasāda, he distributed
lemons, water, salt and cups for water. When the
Vaiṣṇavas had finished, he would throw away their leaf-
plates and clean their eating places.

He strictly adhered to his vow of completing his
chanting of harināma daily but always completed his
studies. He was like the shadow of my śrī gurupāda-
padma, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī, serving him in every
possible way.




Accepting Dīkṣā


After Prabhupāda entered his unmanifest pastimes,
conflicts took place among the devotees in the Gauḍīya
Maṭha. Without sound reason, the opposing party jailed
our most worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva and forty of Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s senior, respectable disciples. Among them
were Śrīla Narahari Sevā-vigraha Prabhu, Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja, pūjyapāda Bhakti Kuśala Nārasiṁha
Mahārāja, pūjyapāda Paramahaṁsa Mahārāja and pūjyapāda
Hṣīkeśa Mahārāja. It was Śrī Sajjana Sevaka alone who
would bring the files regarding the case to the lawyer
and go to court, as well as cook prasāda and bring it to

                           4
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

the jail for all forty devotees.

At that time Śrīla Gurudeva gave him the dīkṣā-mantras,
but could not perform his upanāyana-saṁskāra, or sacred
thread ceremony. Some people say that Śrī Sajjana Sevaka
Brahmacārī (Śrīpāda Vāmana Mahārāja) accepted harināma
and dīkṣa from pūjyapāda Bhakti Vicāra Yāyāvara
Mahārāja. But the truth is that he received harināma
from jagad-guru nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda
aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Gosvāmī, and dīkṣā from my gurupāda-padma, Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

At that time Śrīla Gurudeva had not yet received
sannyāsa, nor was he accepting disciples: therefore
pūjyapāda Yāyāvara Mahārāja performed Śrī Sajjana Sevaka
Brahmacārī’s upanāyana-saṁskāra, but factually, Sajjana
Sevaka was the dīkṣā disciple of our gurudeva.




Establishing Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti and Preaching
with Śrī Gurupāda-padma


In 1942, after the disappearance of Śrīla Prabhupāda, my
gurupāda-padma established Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti in
Bosapāḍā Lane, Kolkata. Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī
was there at that time, as was Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja. And in 1943, when Śrīla Gurudeva
established Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī was with
him there also.

He performed all types of service for Śrīla Gurudeva,
including cooking for him. And when Śrīla Gurudeva would
leave to preach in the cities and towns on either side
of the Gaṅgā, Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī would
accompany him as his prominent assistant and servant.




Exemplary Vaiṣṇava-sevā


Once, a large number of devotees attended some special
occasion at Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti’s centre at
Bosapāḍā Lane, but somehow no one was available to cook
for them. Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī was ill with a
103 degree fever at that time. Still, Śrīla Guru
Mahārāja came to him and instructed him to rise from bed
and cook. He immediately did so and afterwards served
the visiting Vaiṣṇavas prasāda. By this he demonstrated
that in the service of his gurudeva, he did not even
care for his life. Shortly after this incident, his good
health returned.




                           5
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt


His Affection for Me


In about 1945, under the guidance of Śrīla Guru
Mahārāja, a disciple of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda went to preach in Sahabaganja in the state of
Bihar. That devotee, Srīla Narottamānanda Brahmacārī
(later pūjyapāda Bhakti Kamala Madhusūdana Mahārāja) was
renown for his wonderful explanations of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. He was traveling with Śrī Bhakti Kuśala
Nārasiṁha Mahārāja, pūjyapāda Rādhānātha Brahmacārī
(later pūjyapāda Trivikrama Mahārāja), Prema-prayojana
Brahmacārī and Govardhana Brahmacārī. It was then that I
met the devotees and gradually began to perform bhajana
according to the conception of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

From that time on I would write letters to Śrīla
Gurudeva, and Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī sent me
replies on Gurudeva’s behalf. In those letters he
addressed me as “Tivārījī”, as I hailed from a Tivārījī
family. Then, in 1946, I left my family
responsibilities, wife, job and all else and journeyed
to Śrī Dhāma Navadvīpa without notifying anyone about my
coming. I arrived in the middle of the night so the
train station was in darkness. Then, on the platform, I
noticed someone with a lantern calling out, “Tivārījī,
Tivārījī!” It was Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī looking
for me! When I heard my name being called I immediately
knew it was him.

I went with him to the maṭha, and on the way I asked him
how he knew of my arrival on that particular train. He
said, “Śrīla Guru Mahārāja told me, Śrīman Nārāyaṇa
Tivārī is arriving on this train tonight, so you should
go there to greet him and bring him to the maṭha.” From
that time on, Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī cared for me
in every respect, supplying me with cloth and whatever
else I needed. He always showed me much affection and I
came to regard him as my śikṣā-guru.




Śrī Bṛhad-mṛdaṅga Sevā


Śrīla Guru Mahārāja established a printing press in the
Chuṅchurā Maṭha near Kolkata to publish Śrī Gauḍīya
Patrikā and other Gauḍīya scriptures. At that time Śrī
Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī was the commander of that
maṭha. He took full charge of the Patrikā, selecting all
its contents, proofreading and bringing it to press.

Once, while working with the printing press, his finger
was seriously cut and blood gushed forth. He simply
wrapped a cloth around it and continued with his
service. At that time Śrīla Guru Mahārāja was staying
there. As soon as he heard what had happened, he ran
there, weeping. Immediately Śrīla Gurudeva brought Śrī
Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī by car to the medical college
in Kolkata where his finger was treated. This incident
illustrates his dedication to serving Śrīla Gurudeva and

                           6
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

Śrīla Gurudeva’s parental affection for him.




His Transcriptions Were Faultless


Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī would always be on hand to
take dictation for Śrīla Gurudeva’s editorial, even when
thousands of people who had come for parikramā would
come to meet with Gurudeva. Even at such a busy time,
Śrīla Gurudeva would dictate the editorial for the
Patrikā, and Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī would write
it down. Without any proofreading, his work, always
faultless, was sent directly to press. Śrīla Guru
Mahārāja perfectly expressed his thoughts in words, and
Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī perfectly transcribed
them, just like Gaṇeśa, whose transcription contained no
error.




Referencing Ślokas in Service to the Sampradāya


Śrī Sajjana Sevaka Brahmacārī lived for some time in Śrī
Śyāmānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha, Medinīpura. Śrī Anantarāma
Brahmacārī [later pūjyapāda Śrīla Bhakti Jīvana
Janārdana Mahārāja] was also there at that time.

In order to compose an important essay, the references
for two ślokas were needed. The ślokas were:


sampradāya-vihīnā ye

mantrās te niṣphalā matāḥ

ataḥ kalau bhaviṣyanti

catvāraḥ sampradāyinaḥ

Prameya-ratnāvalī (1.5)

(quoted from Padma Purāṇa)


Unless one has been initiated into the sampradāyas by a
bona fide spiritual master, the mantra received will be
without effect. In the age of Kali there will only be
four bona fide sampradāyas.


janmanā jāyate śūdraḥ

saṁskārād dhi bhaved dvijaḥ

veda-pāṭhād bhaved vipraḥ

brahma-jānātīti brāhmaṇaḥ

                              7
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt


Smṛti-vākya


By birth, everyone is a śūdra. One becomes dvija (twice
born) upon receiving spiritual purification (saṁskāra)
from a spiritual master. By studying the Vedas one
becomes a vipra. The real brāhmaṇa, however, is one who
knows brahma.

In Vṛndāvana, some gosvāmīs and bābājīs had been saying
that these two ślokas are not found anywhere in the
śāstras. They were also saying that there were more than
four sampradāyas and that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is not
in the line of Madhvācārya. They said that He
established the Gauḍīya sampradāya Himself, and that
this sampradāya is not within the Śrī Madhva sampradāya.

The two brahmacārīs went to the king’s impressive
library in Mahiṣādala near the town of Medinīpura. They
stayed there for several days, combing through many
books until they found the required references. While
there, they took the opportunity to read most of the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava scriptures, as well as the Upaniṣads
and Purāṇas that were available in that library.




Accepting Sannyāsa


For the first time in our society Śrīla Gurudeva awarded
sannyāsa to three people, during the 1952 Śrī Navadvīpa-
dhāma parikramā. They were Śrī Sajjana Sevaka
Brahmacārī, Śrī Rādhānātha dāsa Adhikārī (Vrajavāsī) and
me (Śrī Gaura-nārāyaṇa dāsa Adhikārī). Our respective
sannyāsa names were Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Trivikrama Mahārāja and
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa.

The relationship we shared was intimate, as if we were
one soul in three bodies. Since I was last to join the
maṭha among the three of us, both pūjyapāda Vāmana
Mahārāja and pūjyapāda Trivikrama Mahārāja showered me
with much affection. All three of us shared the
responsibility of determining what services needed to be
done, but pūjyapāda Trivikrama Mahārāja and I respected
pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja as our śikṣā-guru.




A Living Gauḍīya Dictionary


Śrīla Guru Mahārāja once took five sannyāsīs and ten to
twelve brahmacārīs preaching in Assam. We came to the
village of Bārīpaḍā, which was largely populated by the
disciples of Haṅkaradeva, who had written the so-called
‘Thirteenth Canto’ of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. His followers
worshipped Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but also ate meat, fish

                              8
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

and other abominable foodstuffs. In a large gathering,
Śrīla Guru Mahārāja declared that the mouths of those
who perform śrī kṛṣṇa-bhajana while eating meat and fish
and drinking alcohol are like sewers full of stool and
urine.

Upon hearing this, Haṅkaradeva’s numerous disciples
began to attack the devotees on stage with sticks and
stones. Tumult erupted and people scattered.
Nonetheless, Śrīla Guru Mahārāja remained still and
calm. “If you want to fight, we can also take up sticks
and stones. You should calm down and listen. Those with
questions or doubts are welcome to present them.”

The followers of Haṅkaradeva declared Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu to be an ordinary person, not an incarnation
of God, and requested evidence of His supreme position.
Śrīla Guru Mahārāja motioned to pūjyapāda Vāmana
Mahārāja, indicating he should speak. Pūjyapāda Vāmana
Mahārāja stood up and quoted thirty-five or so ślokas,
starting with kṛṣṇa varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam and channa
avatāra, to prove that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is indeed
God. The audience was astonished and silenced. In this
way the preaching program concluded without further
impediment.




Preaching in the Villages of Bengal


Upon the completion of Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha’s śrī
mandira and temple hall in Śrī Dhāma Navadvīpa, Śrīla
Gurudeva sent pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja out to preach
with some brahmacārīs. They went to towns and villages
in Twenty-four Paraganās, in the south of West Bengal.
Pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja endured many hardships in
reaching out to the people and distributing the message
of Mahāprabhu in remote areas, particularly in Kakadvīpa
and the Sundarbans. When he preached, he demonstrated an
extraordinary capacity to tolerate severe difficulties.
He would always offer respect to others in full
humility. And he could expertly refute any
misconceptions about the Absolute Truth.




His Expertise in the Art of Speaking Sweetly while
Refuting Bogus Philosophies


Pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja could speak harikathā for
three or four hours. When it was necessary for him to
refute the misconceptions of the sahajiyās, the
impersonalists or those who conceive that every
philosophy is valid (yata mata tata patha) he would
speak so sweetly that no one, not even the members of
that sect, would become hurt or offended. Furthermore,
they were able to appreciate the depth of the philosophy
he was presenting.

                           9
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt




His Compilation of the Transcendental Life of Śrīla
Gurudeva


On the order of Śrīla Gurudeva, Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja
printed many books, such as Jaiva-dharma, Navadvīpa-
bhāva-taraṅga, Gauḍīya Gīti-guccha, Navadvīpa-śatakam,
Navadvīpa-dhāma Parikramā and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.
He also wrote wonderful articles for the Gauḍīya
Patrikā.

He refuted others’ misconceptions, but he would do it in
such a way that their feelings were not hurt, as if
carefully performing a surgical operation. After the
disappearance of Śrīla Guru Mahārāja, Śrīla Vāmana
Mahārāja compiled his transcendental life history. He
had regularly noted down his activities and pastimes and
used this information in this book that comprised Śrīla
Gurudeva’s entire life, from his appearance to his
disappearance.

It included accounts of his accepting the shelter of
Śrīla Prabhupāda, serving the Gauḍīya Maṭha, his niṣṭhā
in Prabhupāda, his developing Māyāpura, his establishing
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti after the disappearance of
Śrīla Prabhupāda and then preaching all over India, his
parikramās of various dhāmas and tīrthas, and his giving
sannyāsa. In particular, it presented Śrīla Gurudeva’s
line of thought in a marvellous way.

This book also described the pilgrimages we went on with
Śrīla Gurudeva to such places as Śrī Jagannātha Purī
[including parikramā of the entire Kṣetra-maṇḍala],
Kāśī-dhāma, Ayodhyā-dhāma, Vāsukinātha, Naimiṣāraṇya,
Vaidyanātha-dhāma, Bhadracalam, Prayāga, Mathurā-
maṇḍala, 84 kośa Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā, Dvārakā, Rana-
chodajī, Kūrmācala, Panna Narasiṁha, Jeo-Narasiṁha,
Pakṣi-tīrtha, Trivandrum, Uḍupī, Veṅkaṭeśvaram, Śrī
Raṅgam, Kedāra, Bādri, Mumbādevī Kāmākhya-devī,
Mahābalipuram, Padmanābha Tīrtha, Viṣṇu-kāñcī, Śiva-
kañcī, Daṇḍakāraṇya and Citrakūṭa.




A Strong Decision


Once, one of Śrīla Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s disciples,
who was somewhat uncontrolled, started to regularly
quarrel with the people living near the maṭha, and also
with the maṭha devotees. He did not even offer respect
to the sannyāsīs. His behaviour became a topic for the
annual meeting. Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja said that unless
chastised, people like this never change and they ruin
the atmosphere in the maṭha. He said that if necessary
this person should be expelled from the maṭha. Finally,
those in the meeting agreed. Therefore at times, he

                           10
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

would demonstrate impartiality even to his own
disciples.




An Ācārya in the Anugatya of His Godbrothers


Although pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja was the ācārya, he
was completely devoid of the pride of being an ācārya,
and it was observed in his life that he would always
willingly remain under the guidance of his Godbrothers.
During Navadvīpa parikramā, before he would give
initiations, he would come to Śrīla Trivikrama Mahārāja
and to me and say, “O Mahārāja, please order me to give
initiations.”

Once, while in Nīlācala Gauḍīya Maṭha in Purī-dhāma,
pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja became ill. He tried
homeopathic and Ayurvedic medicine, but his condition
remained the same. People begged him to go to a doctor
in Kolkata, but he would not heed their requests because
he did not want to independently take maṭha funds for
his own health.

When news of his condition reached me, I immediately
went to Purī along with Navīna-kṛṣṇa Brahmacārī [now
Śrīpāda Bhaktivedānta Mādhava Mahārāja] and told him
that he could not stay there, we would not allow it. I
requested him to kindly come with us to Kolkata where we
would arrange for his medical care. He immediately began
to make plans to leave and told his servants, “Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja has come, so I must go to Kolkata.”

On another occasion when he became ill, he went to our
maṭha in Sidhabarī, near Asansol in Bengal. The
atmosphere there is pleasant and healthy, and the
drinking water is good. A famous homeopathic doctor from
that place treated him, but instead of Śrīla Vāmana
Mahārāja recovering his health, he became more ill.

I went there with Navīna-kṛṣṇa Brahmacārī and when he
saw me he said, “Now Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja won’t let me stay
here. Navīna, come and pack my bags. I am about to be
given a military order to leave.” That evening we left
for Kolkata and after a few days of treatment he
recovered his health.




Faith in his Godbrother


I once sent pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja a letter request-
ing him to come to Mathurā because many people there
wanted to take harināma and dīkṣā initiation.
Furthermore, if he came, the people of Mathurā could
take his darśana.

He wrote back, “I told you long ago, and I am telling

                           11
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

you again, that you yourself should, without hesitation,
give harināma and dīkṣā initiation. My health is not
good. If you do this it will save me from having to
travel and the preaching there will not be hindered.”

How rare it is to find a Vaiṣṇava ācārya like him who,
with trust and magnanimity, instructs his Godbrother to
give harināma and dīkṣā. These days, differences and
quarrels take place in maṭhas about this subject matter
alone.




Advocating Bhajana in the Mood of Rādhā-dāsyam


Sometimes, especially during Navadvīpa parikramā,
pūjyapāda Trivikrama Mahārāja and I would have loving
quarrel (prema-kalaha). They would even take place on
the stage, in public. He would cut my arguments and I
would cut his. Once, in the course of one such quarrel,
I presented mādhurya-rasa according to the conception of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. My point was that on the strength of
their service to Śrī Rādhā, Her maidservants (dāsīs) do
not even care to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa. I quoted the śloka, na
pāraye ’haṁ niravadya-saṁyujām (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
10.32.22). Śrī Kṛṣṇa is saying “O gopīs, even if I lived
as along as Lord Brahmā or any other demigod, I would
not be able to repay My debt to you.”

In Gīta-govinda (3.7.9) we see that when Śrīmatī Rādhikā
is in māna, Kṛṣṇa says “O dearest Rādhikā, I will never
offend You like that again. Please forgive Me.” And also
in Gīta-govinda (10.19.8): “smara-garala khaṇḍanaṁ mama
śirasi maṇḍanaṁ dehi pada pallavam udāram – My beloved!
Offer the fresh buds of Your enchanting feet as an
ornament upon My head.”

Therefore, in the eyes of tattva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Svayam
Bhagavān, but due to the excellence, or superiority of
āśraya-jātīya-prema (the prema experienced by devotees)
He becomes indebted to Śrīmatī Rādhikā and begs from Her
alms of forgiveness.

Pūjyapāda Trivikrama Mahārāja refuted my statements and
established the bhagavattā, or Godliness, and impor-
tance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In this way there ensued sweet
debates between us. Pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja, the
chairperson of the assembly, witnessed our loving
quarrels and spoke his conclusion. “ ‘Rādhā-pakṣa chāḍi
ye jana se jana, ye bhāve se bhāve thāke āmī to rādhīkā
pakṣa pātī sadā – I am exclusively in the group of Śrī
Rādhājī. I become happy when She is happy, and when She
is sad, I become sad.’ This is the vicāra, or
conception, of the rūpānugas (followers of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī).

“Performing bhajana with the inclination to serve
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the best type of bhajana. It cannot
be said that no one is qualified to perform this kind of
bhajana. In this world there is always a rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇava who is capable of doing such bhajana. Past,

                           12
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

present and future –there will always be someone with
this qualification. To say otherwise is incorrect
because the world would face destruction if it lacked
the presence of such a qualified person.”

His philosophical perspective made a substantial
impression on the audience.




Absorption in Vipralambha-bhajana


From the beginning of his devotional life, pūjyapāda
Vāmana Mahārāja was absorbed in vipralambha-bhajana.
When a disciple came to him to discuss any issue,
especially in relation to management, he would say, “Go
to Śrīpāda Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and he will address your
problem.”

For two or three years before his disappearance he
completely withdrew from the external world, absorbing
himself internally in nāma-bhajana. Sometimes, he was
overwhelmed with ecstasy, and day or night he would call
out, “O Ṭhākurānī, dayā karo! (Give me Your mercy),
Ṭhākurānī! Dayā karo! Kṛpā karo!” He would even cry this
out as he slept.




His Disappearance and Samādhi


In 2004, some days before his disappearance from this
world, Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja was staying on the bank of
the river Gaṅgā at a place called Vaidyavātī, a short
distance from Kolkata. Even though his health was poor
he journeyed to Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma to observe Kārtika-vrata. And in that
month of Kārtika, on the day of Gaura-tṛtīyā, he entered
into Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s nitya-līlā.

On this day I was at Śrī Govardhana performing our
annual Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā with approximately
1000 participants. Śrīpāda Bhaktivedānta Ācārya Mahārāja
and others from Śrī Dhāma Navadvīpa informed me that
Śrīla Vāmana Mahārāja’s samādhi ceremony would not be
performed until I arrived. I had already sent Śrī
Bhaktivedānta Tīrtha Mahārāja and Śrī Bhaktivedānta Vana
Mahārāja to Navadvīpa from Govardhana, but upon hearing
the words of Śrīpāda Bhaktivedānta Ācārya Mahārāja, I
immediately left my responsibilities and went to Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma with Bhaktivedānta Mādhava Mahārāja.

Upon my arrival in Kolkata, however, I learned that
Śrīpāda Bhaktivedānta Ācārya Mahārāja and some new maṭha
devotees had ignored the requests of other sannyāsīs and
senior residents of the maṭha and had placed Śrīla
Vāmana Mahārāja in samādhi in the middle of the night.
They had previously informed me of a scheduled time for

                           13
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

the ceremony, but went ahead and performed it early,
without waiting for us to arrive. This was quite
disconcerting for some of my Godbrothers and for me.
Nonetheless, I went to Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma and,
accompanied by kīrtana, performed pūjā-arcana and
parikramā of his samādhi. A day later, I returned to
Govardhana.




The Ideal Vaiṣṇava


In this way I lived with pūjyapāda Vāmana Mahārāja for
almost sixty years and had the opportunity to closely
observe and understand him. He possessed all the
qualities that are inherent in a Vaiṣṇava. By nature he
was simple, grave, humble, tolerant, overflowing with
guru-niṣṭhā and inclined to serve the Vaiṣṇavas. This
situated him on a high level of bhakti.

I have seen many people, including myself, who give
explanations from the scriptures and enjoy taking praise
from others for it. But having known pūjyapāda Vāmana
Mahārāja for so long, I have never seen him do this, not
even by accident. He is also very tolerant. As if taking
poison and digesting it, he may see the faults in
others, but he never speaks about them. He has so much
eagerness to preach the instructions of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and he has preached in all the villages of
West Bengal and Assam. Bhagavān has especially empowered
this great personality with many transcendental
qualities.

His guru-niṣṭhā was astounding. With his life in his
hands, he would step forward and offer himself in the
service of Śrīla Gurudeva. Guru-niṣṭhā is the backbone
of bhakti. I have seen many guru-sevakas, but pūjyapāda
Vāmana Mahārāja’s service to Śrīla Gurudeva with his
body, mind, words and sentiments – as a brahmacārī and
as a sannyāsī – was extraordinary. In this world, such a
guru-sevaka is rare.

We pray to him that while engaged in the eternal service
of Śrīla Gurudeva and Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, he be
merciful upon us all so that we can also perform guru-
sevā with niṣṭhā like him and thus dedicate our lives to
Śrī Guru and his mission.



First Published in Rays of The Harmonist

No. 15, Kārtika, 2005

(CC-BY-SA, Rays of The Harmonist Team)

Paragraphs ending with an asterisk are excerpts from

Śrī Prabhandhāvalī, Chapter 1.

(CC-BY-ND, Gaudiya Vedanta Publications)

                           14
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt




PART TWO


Self Assessment on the Disappearance Day of Śrīla
Gurupāda-padma

Excerpt from a lecture by

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Delivered on October 5th, 1998

Śrī Śyāmasundara Gauḍīya Maṭha, Śiliguḍi (West Bengal)




Never Forget Śrī Guru


Today’s special festival marks the beginning of the last
month of our Cāturmāsya-vrata. This last month of
Cāturmāsya is called Kārtika-vrata, Ūrja-vrata or
Dāmodara-vrata. Since today is also sāradīya-rāsayātrā,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s autumn rāsa-līlā, it evokes special
remembrance of the disappearance day of our most
worshipable Śrīla Gurupāda-padma, nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Therefore, as I begin my talk,
I first pray to the lotus feet of Śrīla Gurupāda-padma
for increasing enthusiasm in my sādhana-bhajana.

Today is the disappearance day (viraha-tithi) of our
gurudeva, the day on which we observe our separation
from him. Although the appearance and disappearance days
of those in our Gauḍīya guru-varga are of equal
significance, the common man often thinks that he need
only faithfully devote himself to his gurudeva as long
as his gurudeva is physically present. He tends to
forget his gurudeva when his gurudeva disappears from
this world, or in other words, conceals his manifest
pastimes. This inconsistency is vanquished by constant
engagement in the service of Śrī Hari, Guru and
Vaiṣṇavas. If they are the constant objects of our
remembrance, it will not be possible to forget them. But
if we have a motive to receive some temporary gain from
them, we will easily forget them.

Forgetfulness of Bhagavān is the sole cause of all our
miseries.


bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo ’smṛtiḥ

tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ


                            15
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.37)

The jīva who is averse to Bhagavān forgets his own
constitutional nature because of his association with
māyā. Due to this forgetfulness, he becomes absorbed in
the conception that he is the material body and thus
thinks “I am a demigod”, “I am a human being”, etc. In
this state of bodily identification, he fears old age,
disease and so forth. Therefore those who know the truth
should consider their own guru as īśvara, the Supreme.
In other words, they should see him as their master who
is non-different from Bhagavān and who is very dear to
Him. Through exclusive devotion they should perform one-
pointed worship of that īśvara, their guru.

Our faults and misfortune are the results of our
forgetting Bhagavān and we will never be fortunate
enough to remember Him as long as we are forgetful of
śrī guru and the Vaiṣṇavas. Therefore, when we perform
bhajana, it is imperative that we first remember śrī
guru and the Vaiṣṇavas. First we must pray for their
mercy; only then can we pray for service of Bhagavān Śrī
Hari. The scriptures describe this to be the one and
only process for remembering Him.




Śrī Guru – Our Constant Guide


As long as Śrīla Gurudeva is physically present we
should desire to learn the process of sādhana-bhajana
from him. But instead, we are more eager to know answers
to questions such as: “How shall I maintain my life?”,
“How shall I eat?” and “How shall I clothe myself?” For
those who are true sādhakas, however, eating, sleeping
and dressing are of no real importance. Such sādhakas
only value that which pertains to sādhana-bhajana.

Śrīla Gurudeva gives instructions such as, “You should
chant the holy name; you should chant mantras, such as
the gāyatrī-mantra; you should discuss devotional books
and topics; and you should engage in the arcana and pūjā
of the deity. Begin by performing sādhana-bhakti and try
to advance gradually.”

At present we are ignorant and do not have correct con-
ceptions of sādhana-bhakti, bhāva-bhakti and prema-
bhakti. If we did, we would be absorbed in contemplating
them exclusively. Since that is not the case, what
should we do?


deha-geha-kalatrādi cintā avirata

jāgiche hṛdaye mora buddhi’ kori’ hata

hāya hāya nāhi bhāvi anitya ai saba

jīvana vigate kothā rahibe vaibhāva?

                              16
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt


Śrī Kalyāṇa-kalpa-taru

(2nd branch, Part 2, Song 4)


Anxiety for my body, house, wife and so forth constantly
arises in my heart, thus destroying my intelligence.
Alas, Alas! I do not understand them to be temporary. Do
worldly comforts and opulences remain after death?

In this way the authors of the scriptures are telling
us, and also the great Vaiṣṇavas (mahājanas) are making
it known, that this body is temporary. Still, we fail to
proceed with caution.

Despite our lackings, we are to patiently keep trying.
We have to continue following the instructions of Hari,
Guru and Vaiṣṇavas – this is of utmost importance. We
repeatedly hear about the same subjects, but our heart
and mind cannot retain what we have heard. And even if
we do retain it, mere mental retention of information is
of no real value. It is necessary to practice what we
hear and live by it. Only then does what we hear take on
any real significance. But despite hearing, hearing and
more hearing, we all too soon tend to forget what we
have heard.




Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka – the Complete Process


We often see that newcomers to the path of sādhana-
bhajana are enthusiastic, but as time goes by, they see
it as ordinary and their eagerness wanes.

What method, then, is appropriate for us? How should we
practise sādhana? Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, the instructions of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, was previously known as
sādhana-patha, the path of sādhana. We may be on the
path of sādhana, but we are forgetting that path. Why
does such forgetfulness occur when daily we are reciting
that same Śikṣāṣṭaka? Why do our enthusiasm and patience
diminish? That it does, reveals that we are not
performing sādhana with antara-niṣṭhā, inner
steadfastness.

Forgetfulness [of the path of sādhana] can also result
from over-endeavour. We need to contemplate whether our
forgetfulness is due to over-endeavour or lack of
endeavour. Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s Śikṣāṣṭaka begins with
“vijayate śrī kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam – may the congregational
chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s holy name be victorious!” And
Śikṣāṣṭaka concludes with verses about weeping for
Kṛṣṇa. Both the beginning and end of the process are
given. But if I am a beginner to the path of sādhana,
how can I cry? A person only cries when he is in need of
something, something specific. Do we have any conception
of our highest need?



                           17
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt




Nothing Less than Absolute Happiness


“I want the mercy of śrī guru, the Vaiṣṇavas and
Bhagavān.” Indeed, such contemplation nurtures the
desire to attain my highest goal. How? Our guru-varga
says that if we want to realize our highest aspiration,
we should not limit our desire for it, as this will not
help us attain it. Artha-śāstra (the Vedic scripture on
material prosperity) instructs a person to place a limit
on his aspirations for happiness. Why? “nālpe sukhamasti
bhūmaiva sukham – there is no happiness in this
creation.” This creation is full of limitations. The
only abode of complete happiness is Bhagavān. In the
realm of parama-artha, or supreme spiritual welfare,
limitations have no value. We don’t have to be satisfied
with the limited happiness of this world. If we are, we
will be cheated.

If one accepts the statement, “bhūmaiva sukham –
complete happiness is only found in Bhagavān” to be
true, one must endeavour to attain it. The scriptures
say, “yatne kṛte yadi na siddhati ko’tra doṣaḥ – If, in
spite of my efforts, I am still unable to attain Him,
what shall I do? Where is my fault?” Who will judge
whether or not I have made my best possible effort? Who
will decide the extent of my eagerness for sādhana-
bhajana? And who will make this known to me? This needs
to be contemplated. A person must know how much
endeavour is required to really attain success.




Measuring Our Progress


Jagad-guru Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura said, “Every
fifteen days, on each Ekādaśī, a person should record
how much progress he has made in his performance of
sādhana-bhajana.” But we do not do that. And should that
record be kept on a piece of paper or within our heart?
Only by recording it in our heart will we be able to
analyse our progress. Every Ekādaśī a person should make
a point to ‘record’ how much harināma he did in the last
fifteen days, how much lime he spent discussing śāstra
and how much service he engaged in. Only then can he
understand whether he is making progress or whether he
is going backwards.

Sometimes, when we hear a certain siddhānta, we may
become disheartened.


nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-prema ‘sādhya’ kabhu naya

śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte karaye udaya

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.107)


                           18
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt


Kṛṣṇa-prema (being eternally present in the heart of the
jīva) is never acquired elsewhere. Hearing, chanting and
remembering the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa purifies the heart and
thus kṛṣṇa-prema naturally awakens.

Upon hearing what is required to attain my goal, I
wonder if I will ever be successful, my enthusiasm
begins to wane and I begin to doubt the strength of my
determination. The Absolute Reality cannot be attained
if this doubt persists. Śrīla Parīkṣit Mahārāja listened
to ample hari-kathā, and his conception of what was
required of him in the line of devotion remained strong.
Now, if our own conception becomes weak, we must simply
move forward from whatever point we have reached in our
hearing, learning and practising.

Our constant concern is whether or   not we are capable of
following all the instructions the   Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
have given us. More importantly we   wonder if we have
really taken these instructions to   heart, or are
endeavouring to understand them.

We all know that “where there is a will there is a way”.
We then note that although we desire to practise
properly, we are not successful. But is this really the
case? If we have an ardent desire and if we are honest
and non-duplicitous then most definitely we will achieve
success. We should question, “How much effort am I
putting into my practices? And to what extent do I try
before I consider my endeavour in sādhana to be
complete? What I may perceive as the end of my efforts
in the realm of sādhana-bhajana may actually be the very
beginning.” This process is not necessarily easy.




Life’s Only Treasure


Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself said:


ki kāja sannyāse mora, prema prayojana

dāsa kori deha more vetana premadhana


What value is sannyāsa to Me? My only goal is prema.
Therefore, O Bhagavān, please accept Me as Your servant
and award Me the salary of prema.

Does this ever enter our minds? The scriptures state,
“pañcāśordhvaṁ vanaṁ vrajet – after the age of fifty,
one should proceed to the forest for the purpose of
performing hari-bhajana.” At that time of life, one’s
exclusive dedication should be the development of
devotion to Śrī Hari. From the perspective of Śrī
Prahlāda Mahārāja, however, one should not wait until
one has turned fifty. If we anticipate that our duration
of life will be a hundred years, simply sleeping
consumes fifty of it. And if one’s life lasts for fifty

                           19
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

years, twenty-five go by in this way. Therefore, in the
remaining half of our lives, we must become one-pointed
in our sādhana-bhajana.

Those who have had some realization will never reveal it
to anyone. Why not? Such realization is parama-artha,
the topmost treasure, and therefore should not be
disclosed. And those who tell others about the treasure
they have gained are like poverty stricken people who
boast the amount of rupees in their possession, when
actuality, their wealth is insignificant. Those who are
intelligent never wander here and there telling others
about their topmost wealth. You can be led into trouble
simply by speaking.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam says, “It is difficult to earn money,
it is difficult to save money and it is painful to spend
money.” But the outcry of so many of us is solely for
the possession and control of money. And when asked,
“For what?” we answer, “For the service of Hari, Guru
and Vaiṣṇavas. After all, we are their servants; this is
stated in the scriptures.” But what understanding do we
actually have of this?

One should first learn and understand Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s teachings – the tattva and siddhānta of Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Without such understanding, we will
not be able to perform sādhana-bhajana, in which the
first, essential step is to understand what is
beneficial to our bhajana and what is not. However,
simply attaining this knowledge is insufficient. One
must, in this very life, practise what one has learned.



Translated from Śrī Gauḍīya Patrikā,

Year 56, Issue 11

First Published in Rays of The Harmonist

No. 15, Kārtika, 2005

(CC-BY-SA, Rays of The Harmonist Team)




PART THREE


Śrī Hari, Guru & Vaiṣṇavas Are Moved by Our Emotions

A letter by

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Śrī Vāsudeva Gauḍīya Maṭha

Postal: Vāsu-Gāñj (Goyāla-Pāḍā), Assam

21 September, 1979


                             20
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt



śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅga jayataḥ!

[In the letter published in Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s Patrāvalī, the recipient was
kept anonymous.]

I received a letter from you many days ago. I should
have replied to your warm letter much sooner. Forgive me
for failing to reply in a timely manner. Your weeping is
so overwhelming that it breaks everyone’s heart. In your
letter, you referred to yourself as my ‘fallen
daughter’. In the shower of your tears, even the heart
of a stone-hearted person like me is torn asunder. Śrī
Bhagavān shall fulfil your heart’s desires. Protect your
great enthusiasm and forbearance within your heart. If
you envision the smiling faces of śrī gurudeva and the
Vaiṣṇavas and remember their instructions and teachings,
you will find peace of mind at all times, in all
circumstances.

I came to Kṛṣṇa-nagara for the occasion of the deity
installation, which was held on Akṣaya-Tṛtīya in the
month of Vaiśākha (May), but at that time I had no
chance to converse with you properly. It seems,
therefore, that you have become dissatisfied with me. I
hope that after understanding the gravity of my
situation on that occasion, you have forgiven me. At
that time, I presumed that perhaps you were angry with
me and hurt, but upon receiving your letter my
presumption was proved wrong.

Because you always weep, to console you I am always
saying, “O Mother, please do not cry.” Śrī Bhagavān
shall certainly bestow auspiciousness upon you. Do not
feel upset that you have no monetary fortune and
therefore cannot donate anything for service. One serves
Śrī Hari and guru through one’s wealth, words, mind and
one’s very spirit (prāṇa). Those who do not have wealth
should serve with their words, mind and spirit. To
surrender one’s mind and spirit to śrī gurudeva and
Bhagavān is the most excellent donation, for the mind
and spirit are the supreme forms of wealth. If you are
able to anxiously cry to śrī gurudeva and Bhagavān, you
shall obtain the fruit of donating everything. And in
that fruit your heart shall find joy and peace.

You wrote truthfully when you explained that in this
world you cannot call anyone your own except for guru,
Vaiṣṇavas and Bhagavān. If we make them our own, only
then will our lives be successful and all of our efforts
blessed. Therefore, the mahājanas have sung, “tava nija-
jana, parama bāndhava, saṁsāra kārāgāre – your personal
associates are our dearest relatives and greatest
friends in this jailhouse of material existence.” It is
essential to realize this deep down in our hearts.
Affection and loving possessiveness cannot be displayed
in front of just anyone, for they are the exchange of
emotions of the heart.

For this reason, even tears of devotion often become the
cause of criticism and misinterpretation if they are
shed in the presence of ordinary people. Those very

                           21
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

tears give many people an opportunity to falsely judge
you, to misunderstand you and so on. Therefore, in
matters of hari-bhajana, specific instructions have been
provided regarding proper times, places and
circumstances. Śrī guru, the Vaiṣṇavas and Bhagavān are
present within the heart. They know and embrace the
emotions we feel for them. Therefore, whether we cry in
front of them or out of their sight, our every cry truly
reaches them. Śrī Bhagavān sat down for His meal in
Dvārakā – Rukmiṇī-devī was serving Him – but at that
moment in Kāmyavana, within Vṛndāvana, Draupadī’s cry
reached Him from over a thousand miles away.1

1978 was the year your assets were lost. You wrote that
you have undergone punishments comparable to residing in
hell. As long as this body remains, pain and sorrow,
sickness and disease, and suffering and torment will
surely also remain. Most likely, you only went to the
hospital because you were bound to. What you wrote is
true – hospitals are like lakes from hell. There, you
suffer hellish torture. The stench there makes life
unbearable and before your eyes people die and writhe in
pain. It is truly horrific. I understand that they even
put you in the morgue. It was Śrī Bhagavān alone who
protected you. You will never forget śrī gurudeva and
Bhagavān, and you will faithfully perform hari-bhajana.

You wish to know whether your fortune will be like that
of the other two you mentioned. You wrote how they were
born to a wealthy family and are serving so much and
performing so much bhajana, while the crying in your
heart stays in your heart alone. Is it that without
money it is not possible for someone to perform hari-
bhajana?

Why did you become so morose simply because you could
not afford to give me a donation this time? The anxious
fervour in your heart is certainly acknowledged by śrī
guru and Vaiṣṇavas, who are very compassionate. Although
you have no worldly wealth (artha), Śrī Bhagavān will
see how you are crying and bless you with supreme,
transcendent wealth (paramārtha). Of this there can be
no doubt.

*****

I understand that, despite being my mother, you have not
yet had the opportunity to serve me by cooking for me
with your own hands. I will come to your straw hut,
relish the preparations cooked by your own hand, and
take prasāda. This hope of yours will be fulfilled. In
your home, kīrtana and class will be held. According to
your means, you will most definitely be able to invite
and feed eight to ten devotees. We will certainly come
to your home and take prasāda. Do not worry; I hereby
make you fearless in this regard. And please do not be
angry with me for taking so long to reply.

Without worries, without disturbance, chant harināma.
Maintain a practice of studying some scripture as time
permits. Sing the songs of the mahājanas. Chant your
gāyatrī three times a day. We are honoured to be invited
to the house of Vidura to partake of the foodstuffs
prepared by the hand of Vidurānī.2 We will be satisfied

                           22
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

just by tasting the preparations of green leaves and
rice you will prepare.

I will be coming with the party to Kṛṣṇa-nagara around
the 20th of the forthcoming month of Pauṣa [December–
January]. At that time, I will come to your house one
day, take prasāda and hold class, kīrtana and so on. For
those who have no one else in this world, Śrī Bhagavān,
śrī guru and the Vaiṣṇavas are their only aid, so why
have you written that you are unfortunate? Those who
immerse their minds in hari-bhajana by taking shelter of
sad-guru are the fortunate ones. Their births are
blessed and successful. Selfish, worldly people are
forever critically analyzing devotees, but none of their
judgments can harm you.

May my fallen daughters and my crazy sons continue to
serve Śrī Hari in happiness and peace. The all-
auspicious Lord will certainly shower beneficence upon
them. In your letter, you have indicated that you remain
awake, late at night and express your inner agony,
babbling incoherently. Know that I would never be
indifferent to such a matter. May Śrī Bhagavān grant me
the intelligence to at least be able to contemplate the
simplicity of your heart. Otherwise I am concerned that
this son of a crazy mother and father will surely become
crazy before long.

If even after obtaining śrī guru and Vaiṣṇavas as your
sons you still feel childless, then you should accept
the provision that you should acknowledge Śrī Gopāla-
kṛṣṇa alone to be your son, for such a son will never
die, nor will He cause you to weep. By accepting Śrī
Bhagavān to be our mother and father, our child and
friend, our husband and our supreme master, we will
never have to fall victim to mundane sorrow and
delusion. So know Him to be your one and only son. He
will never be the cause of sorrow and suffering for you.

Accept my unlimited, affectionate blessings. I am some-
how or another doing fine. I conclude here –

Your ever well-wisher,

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Vāmana



Translated from the Patrāvalī (compilation of letters)
of

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Published in English for the first time in

Rays of The Harmonist No. 21, Gaura Purṇimā, 2010

(CC-BY-SA, Rays of The Harmonist Team)




* * *

                           23
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt




1 C.f. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.15.11) wherein the Lord
saves the Pāṇḍavas from incurring Durvāsā Ṛṣi’s wrath.



2 Once, Kṛṣṇa rejected the opulent meal offered to Him
by Duryodhana, who lacked devotion, in favour of the
exceedingly simple offering made by the wife of Vidura
(Vidurānī), who possessed great devotion.




About Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


On the sacred and auspicious day of Maunī Amāvasyā,
1921, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
took his divine birth in a devout Vaiṣṇava family in
Tivārīpura, in the state of Bihar, India.

In February, 1946, he met his gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and his life of
complete and exemplary dedication to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism,
or the path of kṛṣṇa-bhakti in the line of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, began to manifest.

He accompanied his gurudeva on his extensive preaching
tours throughout India, actively assisting him in
propagating the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu for
the eternal benefit of the living entities in this
world. This included regularly hosting the thousands of
pilgrims attending the yearly circumambulation of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, the appear-ance place of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, the appearance
place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

His gurudeva had instructed him to translate the
writings of prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas into Hindi, a
task he assiduously assumed throughout his entire life
and which resulted in the publication of nearly fifty
Hindi sacred texts. Later, most of these invaluable
masterpieces were translated into English and other
major languages of the world.

For many years, he traveled throughout India to spread
the message of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, and it was for this
end, also, that in 1996, he journeyed abroad. During the
next fourteen years, he circled the globe more than
thirty times. Whether he was in India or abroad, his
preaching always bore the distinctive characteristic of
boldly unmasking any misconception obscuring the
specific purposes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s advent,
in strict adherence to the desire of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda and in
perfect congruence with the conceptions of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s foremost follower.
Thus, in present times, in upholding the glorious tenets

                           24
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt

of the Gauḍīya sampradāya, he performed the function of
a true ācārya.

At the age of ninety years, on December 29, 2010, he
concluded his pastimes in this world at Cakratīrtha, in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma. The following day, in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, Śrī Gaurasundara’s fully empowered
emissary, the very embodiment of His unique compassion,
was given samādhi. He will never cease to reside in his
divine instructions and in the hearts of those who are
devoted to him.




English titles published by

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja


Arcana-dīpikā • Beyond Nīrvāṇa • Bhagavad-gītā •
Bhajana-rahasya • Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindu-bindu • Bhakti-
rasāyana • Bhakti-tattva-viveka • Brahma-saṁhitā •
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Vol. 2.1) • Butter Thief • Caitanya
Mahāprabhu – The Original Form of Godhead • Camatkāra-
candrikā – A Moonbeam of Complete Astonishment •
Controlled by Love • Dāmodarāṣṭakam • Discerning the
True Sentiments of the Soul • Distinctive Contribution
of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī • Essence of All Advice • Essence of
Bhagavad-gītā • Eternal Function of the Soul • Fearless
Prince • Five Essential Essays • Gauḍīya Gītī-Guccha •
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism versus Sahajiyāism • Gaura-vāṇī
Pracāriṇe • Gift of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu • Gīta-
govinda • Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha • Gopī-gīta • Guru-
devatātmā • Happiness in a Fool’s Paradise • Harināma
Mahā-mantra • Harmony • Hidden Path of Devotion •
Impressions of Bhakti • Jaiva-dharma • Journey of the
Soul • Kṛṣṇa – the Lord of Sweetness • Letters From
America • Maharṣi Durvāsā and Śrī Durvāsā-āśrama •
Manaḥ-śikṣa • My Śikṣā-guru and Priya-bandhu •
Navadvīpa-dhāma Māhātmya • Navadvīpa-dhāma Parikramā •
Nectar of Govinda-līlā • Śrī Jagannātha Ratha-yātrā •
Our Eternal Nature • Our Gurus: One in Siddhanta, One at
Heart • Pinnacle of Devotion • Prabandhāvalī • Prema-
sampuṭa • Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā • Rāga-vartma-
candrikā • Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda • Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ
• Secrets of the Undiscovered Self • Secret Truths of
the Bhāgavatam • Shower of Love • Śikṣāṣṭaka • Śiva-
tattva • Ślokāmṛtam • Ślokāmṛtam-bindu • Soul of Book
Distribution • Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
– His Life and Teachings • Their Lasting Relation • To
Be Controlled by Love • True Conception of Guru-tattva •
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa • Upadeśāmṛta • Utkalikā-vallarī
• Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā • Veṇu-gīta • Śrī Vraja-
maṇḍala Parikramā • Walking with a Saint (2007, 2008,
2009, 2010) • Way of Love • Rays of the Harmonist
(periodical)




Gaudiya Vedanta Publications (GVP)

                              25
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt



publishes, preserves and distributes the books of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. For more
information on the contents of these books, please
visit:




www.purebhakti.com

for news, updates, and free downloads of books, lectures
and bhajanas.




www.purebhakti.tv

to watch and hear classes online, or get links and
scheduled updates for live webcasts




www.harikatha.com

to receive, by email, the lectures and videos of Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja on his
world tours




If you are interested to know more about the books,
lectures, audio recordings, videos, teachings, and the
international society of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, please contact us at

connectwithussoon@gmail.com




or find a center in your area on

www.purebhakti.com/contact-us




YOUR COMMENTS AND FEEDBACK



We humbly invite our readers to submit any errors they
may find in this publication at

                              26
                                                5/8/2017
When-Kindness-and-Compassion-Take-a-Form-_1Ed-2015_.txt


www.purebhakti.com/gvp




YOUR SUPPORT



If you would like to support GVP’s publication,
preservation and distribution of Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s books, you
can:




sponsor the endowment fund of a printed book will assure
that when a book is first printed, there will always be
funding to keep that book in print. For more
information, please visit

www.mygvp.com




sponsor books for the GVP Book Distribution Program.
This program is a federally approved 501 c3 non-profit
religious organization that places Śrīla Gurudeva’s
books in stores, libraries, prisons, hospitals, and many
other locations. It makes the books available to all
people at no cost or low cost. For more information,
please visit

www.gvpbookdistribution.com




                              27
